Extracted from: C:\Users\ajibo\Downloads\Wives-of-the-Leopard-Gender-Politics-and-Culture-in-the-Kingdom-of-Dahomey-by-Edna-G.-Bay-z-lib.org-3.pdf
Extracted on: 2025-03-27 18:20:46.582978

--- Page 1 ---
o t'he 
Gende , Politics, and Culture- in 
the Kingdom of Dahomey 
Edna G. Bay

--- Page 2 ---
Wives of the Leopard

--- Page 3 ---
• 
'·· .. r 
'-

--- Page 4 ---
WIVES of the 
LEOPARD 
Gender, Politics, and Culture in the Kingdom of Dahomey 
Edna G. Bay 
University of Virginia Press 
Charlottesville & London

--- Page 5 ---
The University Press of Virginia 
Cl 1998 by the Rector and Visitors of the University of Virginia 
Al rights reserved 
Printed in the United States of America 
First published 1998 
@>The paper used in this publication meets the minimum requirements of the 
American National Standard for Information Sciences-Permanence of 
Paper for Printed Library Materials, ANSI Z39.48-1984. 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Bay, Edna G. 
Wives of the leopard: gender, politics, and culture in the 
Kingdom of Dahomey I Bdna G. Bay. 
p. 
cm. 
Includes bibliographical references (p. 
) and index. 
ISBN 0-8139-1791-3 (cloth: alk. paper). -ISBN 0-8139-1792-1 
(paper: alk. paper) 
I. Political culture-Benin-History. 
2. Women in politics­
Benin-History. 
3. Benin-Politics and government-To 1960. 
1. Title 
IQ3376.Ag1B39 
1998 
320'.o82'096683-dcz1 
97-45943 
CIP 
Fronti$piece: The Kpojito Hwanjile in 1972. Author's field photo of the replacement 
by positional succession of Dahomey's second Kpojito, HwanjiJe, the reign-mate of 
King Tegbesu

--- Page 6 ---
For Ray

--- Page 7 ---
BLANK PAGE

--- Page 8 ---
List of Illustrations 
Preface 
Author's Note 
Contents 
Chapter I S 
Along the Slave Coast 
Power, the Monarchy, and the Palace 
Learning about Dahomey 
Chapter 2S 
From Dahomey's Origins to 1740 
The Slave Trade and the Founding of the Kingdom 
The Authority of Princesses 
The Conquest of Allada and Whydah 
Customs, Court, and the Palace in the Early 17005 
Adonon and the Creation of the Office of Kpojito 
Chapter 3S 
The Age of Tegbesu and Hwanjile 
Succession 
The Kpojito Hwanjile 
Ministers, Traders. and the Monarchy 
The Impact of Oyo 
Chapter4S 
The Struggle to Maintain the State 
The Reigns of Kpengla, Agoogla, and Adandozan 
The Military in the Late Eighteenth Century 
The Palace in the Late Eighteenth Century 
Successions and Political Instability 
• 
IX 
• 
XI 
xv 
1 
6 
27 
81 
81 
91 
96 
110 
119 
119 
129 
142 
153

--- Page 9 ---
viii 
Contents 
Chapter 5.-
The Implications of Cultural and Commercial Change 
166 
Gezo's Coup d'Etat 
166 
The Kpojito Agontime 
178 
Innovations of the Age of Gezo 
182 
Chapter 6.-
The Decline of Dahomey 
223 
The New Militarism 
226 
Surveillance and the Palace 
233 
Religion and Royal Control 
250 
Succession in the Time of Glele and Behanzin 
259 
Chapter 7.-
War, Disintegration, and the Failure of the Ancestors 
274 
The Rise of Behanzin 
274 
European Imperialism 
277 
The War with the French 
284 
Agoliagbo and the Aftermath of the French Conquest 
305 
Chapter 8.-
Reprise 
312 
Notes 
323 
Glossary 
353 
Bibliography 
355 
Index 
367

--- Page 10 ---
Illustrations 
Dahomey and the Slave Coast 
4 
The Palace of Abomey at the end of the nineteenth century 
10 
Dahomey in the early eighteenth century 
42 
The Kpojito Adonon in 1972 
77 
Center of Abomey showing quarters associated with the kings 
104 
Public procession of the king's women 
127 
Armed women with the king at their head, going to war 
138 
A nineteenth-century king 
261 
Dahomean soldiers in Paris, 1893 
279 
Dahomey and the Slave Coast at the end of the 
nineteenth century 
282 
King Behanzin in exile 
303

--- Page 11 ---
BLANK PAGE

--- Page 12 ---
, 
, 
Preface 
This book has been a long time in the making. I first became intrigued 
with Dahomey more than twenty-five years ago. Looking for a disser­
tation topic that would allow me to study African women's history. I 
stumbled upon Dahomey. notorious for its amawns, and quick1y discov­
ered that women in Dahomey had been involved in much more than 
soldiering. Dahomey seemed a place where women prior to the colonial 
period had enjoyed extraordinary liberties and powers-an ideal subject 
for a young woman, like so many others at the time, looking for patterns 
of female autonomy different from the experience of the West. The work 
that emerged from that initial research was an exploration of women's 
institutions that I called "The Royal Women of Aborney." Drawing on 
evidence from the entire history of the kingdom, it reconstructed offices 
within the palace and elaborated women's importance in kin groups. It 
spoke in terms of an unchanging ethnographic past. but a past in which 
it was dear that women had been important, and powerful, in the state. 
My findings satisfied my search for women of historical importance, 
but I was troubled by a nagging sense that not al of my evidence fit. "The 
Royal Women of Abomey" described women as central to the state, as 
powerful politically. However, when 1 had searched the archives and pub­
lished materials for prominent women in the twentieth century, I had 
found no one. When I had asked people in the field about women and 
politics in the colonial period, I had learned nothing. When 1 attended 
ceremonies and saw the courts of the men who were claimants to the 
royal stool, there were few women officials. Most significantly, not one of 
the three would-be kings of Dahomey in the early 1970S had a kpojito, a 
female reign-mate and the holder of what 1 knew had been the most 
important woman's office. If women had been so important in the king­
dom, why had they and their offices disappeared so completely with the 
imposition of colonial rule? If women had held certain powers, why 
had they relinquished them so rapidly? Why were the women who were 
xl

--- Page 13 ---
xII 
Preface 
visible in late-twentieth-century Abomey mainly adepts of cults, women 
who received the spirits of kings and other gods and deified individuals, 
or priests associated with cults that included the Nesuhwe, which was 
dedicated to the deified dead of the royal family? Why did twentieth­
century women's power seem to be only religious? 
Finn FugIestad turned my thinking in a direction that provided an 
answer. In an article about the origins of Dahomey, he argued that the 
Alladahonu, the ruling family. had violated the usual norms followed by 
newcomers to an area in Africa. By conquering the Abomey plateau and 
ruling by military might alone, the dynasty had refused to make accom­
modations with the "owners of the earth," the people established there 
first who had ritual control over the land. It occurred to me that. to the 
contrary, the kpojito as a reign-mate to the king might represent just such 
an accommodation, because the kpojito were women of common birth, 
and the first one had come from the plateau region. Perhaps she and the 
king together symbolized the accommodation of the newcomers with the 
owners of the earth. More broadly. the Fuglestad article prompted me to 
look at patterns of religion and ritual practice, and I began to realize that 
changes in the hierarchies of the vodun, or gods, were also comments on 
change in the world of humanity. 
A remark by Joseph Miller at an academic conference provided the 
other spark that moved me toward the interpretation of Dahomean his­
tory presented in this book. I had by that point worked out the lines of 
my argument, that by reading the changing hierarchy of the vodun and 
comparing it with historical evidence, one could see that women and 
men of royal, commoner, and slave background had shared power in the 
eighteenth century. In the nineteenth, women and men of commoner 
birth were increasingly excluded from the center, and by the end of the 
century, men of royal birth were monopolizing power in their own 
hands. Hence, it was not surprising to find few women in the twentieth 
century associated with precolonial forms of power. Miller suggested that 
although al those cultural arguments were fine, there had to be an 
economic factor that played a significant role in these changes. The tran­
sition from the slave trade to the palm-oil trade proved to be that factor.

--- Page 14 ---
Preface 
xfll 
In fact, it fit the other evidence so nicely that in writing this book I wor¬ 
ried at times that I was presenting an argument that was at base one of 
economic determinism. 
Having worked out the argument, I needed time to write. My career 
track from 1977 to 1995 was an administrative one, with no time for the 
slow nurturing of ideas and translation to paper (and to electronic im­ 
pulses) that is essential to book preparation. Emory University and the 
African Studies Association, my coemployers at the time, provided a sab­
batical year in 1993/94. The National Humanities Center in Research Tri­
angle Park, North Carolina, also provided financial support, naming me 
their Delta Delta Delta fellow for that year. The center proved the perfect 
place to write and enjoy the intellectual stimulation of a superb body of 
fellows and staff. 
There are many others deserving of recognition and thanks both be® 
fore and after that key sabbatical year. The Foreign Area Fellowship Pro­
gram of the Social Science Research Council sponsored my original field 
research and the National Endowment for the Humanities sent me back 
to Abomey for a related project in 1984. I made use of subsequent short 
stays for conferences in Benin sponsored by the University of Benin and 
by UNESCO to gather additionaJ material. Dozens of generous people 
have helped me over the years. In Benin, I wish to mention the staff of 
the National Archives and the Historical Museum of Abomey, including 
Ernest d'Oliveira, and research colleagues including Amelie Degbelo and 
Elisee Soumonni. Of so many kind friends in Abomey and Cotonou, 
I would recognize particularly Angele and Alexis Feliho, Leonard and 
Camile Loko and their children, and Grice d' Almeida and her extended 
family. Outside of Benin, Robin Law has given me steadfast encourage¯ 
ment and valuable resources over the years. Dr. C. w. Hickcox ofEmory 
University was instrumental in helping me prepare the maps. Finally, I 
thank Ray Ganga. who is aware of the importance he has played in this 
project and in my life.""",

--- Page 15 ---
BLANK PAGE

--- Page 16 ---
,-<7>' 
Author's Note 
My governing objective in presenting this history of Dahomey has been 
to balance scholarly accuracy with accessibility, to write a work that can 
be readily understood by Eng1ish-speaking persons who are not African 
studies specialists. Dahomey presents a bewildering number of names, of 
individuals as well as offices, that threaten readability even for those fa­
miliar with African history. There is no firm agreement on the spelling 
of historical place-names. The name of the kingdom itself, for example, 
appears in the texts used as sources for this work as Dahomey, Dahomy, 
Dahomi, Danxome, Danhome, Dan-hb-min, and Danhome. The spell­
ing of the state and city ofWhydah varies perhaps the most among place­
names. Whydah, the usual spelling in English, is a corruption of the name 
of the people, the Hweda. Portuguese sources use Juda and A;uda, while 
the French spell the name Ouidah. 
Individual names vary, too. The name Glele is sometimes spelled GUM 
or Gelele, and Gezo may be Guezo or Ghezo. I have chosen to use the 
spellings most commonly found in English sources in the expectation 
that Eng1ish-speaking readers who want to learn more about the king­
dom will find further research less tedious. For less familiar names, I have 
tended to retain the spelling of the source. 
Words and phrases in Fongbe, the language of the area that was Da­
homey, have similarly been simplified. There are vowel and consonant 
sounds in Fongbe that are not used in English. Moreover, Fongbe is a 
tonal language, with rising, faling, and modulating tones that change the 
meaning of words. I have not tried to indicate these variations but rather 
have used spellings with the English alphabet that wil convey only an 
approximate pronounciation. Readers should assume that all vowels and 
consonants are pronounced, with the letter j pronounced ee, a as ah, and 
e as eh.""" 
xv

--- Page 17 ---
BLANK PAGE

--- Page 18 ---
1 
Along the Slave Coast 
The palace of the king was the pivot of political life. In this sense, the 
Abomey palace was a microcosm of the kingdom as a whole. 
A. Le Hhrissh, L'Ancien royaume dll Dahomey 
Dahomey epitomized everything negative that the Euro-American imagi­
nation of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries wanted to believe about 
Africa. Dahomey was said to be a state grown rich through the slave 
trade. Over more than 250 years, hundreds of thousands of enslaved Afri­
cans were despatched from its beaches across shark-infested waters and 
into the infamous middle passage. But slavery in the Western Hemi­
sphere was a blessing compared with life in the kingdom, at least as Euro­
American observers described it. Slaves were captured by an army of 
women, amazons who severed their right breasts to be better able to fire 
arrows at their enemies. Foes not brutally decapitated on the battlefield 
by machete-wielding amazons, or not sold overseas after capture, were 
destined to die as sacrifices in horrifying fetish ceremonies. One visitor 
claimed that the king would sail in a boat on a sea of the blood drained 
from the severed necks of sacrifice victims. Others told of half-naked 
men eagerly waiting to eat the flesh of the dead. These rituals were said 
to have sprung from the evil beliefs that in North America were known 
as voodoo, and included the worship of snakes and trees. The absolute 
monarch who presided over this butchery lived in the capital, Abomey, 
in a palace surrounded by twelve-foot-high mud walls topped with rows 
of human skulls. He would sit on a throne supported by the heads of 
princely enemies or recline on a silk-cushioned sofa, where he would be 
served in oriental opulence by thousands of women. The royal harem in 
turn was guarded by eunuchs who indulged in intrigues with the wives 
I

--- Page 19 ---
2 
Along the Slave Coast 
of the king. As for the remainder of the populace, they were all slaves of 
the king. 
Tales of Dahomey were told by many. and prior to the twentieth cen­
tury, the storyteUers were all outsiders: slave traders. abolitionists, mis­
sionaries, diplomats, and officials of European governments. It has of late 
become fashionable to analyze the texts of such writers and travelers, to 
explore the ways in which their apparent observations were molded by 
the cultures of their birth and their life experiences. Like Joseph Conrad's 
Marlowe, we have relearned in such analyses the truism that the horrors 
we perceive tend to be the reflections of our own inner darknesses, and 
that human beings can rarely transcend culture or history. But having 
said that, we are left with the knotty question of Dahomean reaUties. 
W hat was this place called Dahomey like? Did the dozens of visitors make 
up these stories? Were their accounts simply creations of the racist imagi­
nation of Europe? If not, what did people see when they visited Daho­
mey? Can Dahomean culture be understood in other ways? And whose 
words can we trust? Having seen the errors of our predecessors' eyes, how 
can we be certain of the clarity of our own vision? How can we begin to 
understand meanings in other cultures, in other times? 
Since the turn of the twentieth century, many scholars and writers, 
both Dahomeans and outsiders, have tried to counteract the negative 
stereotypes of the kingdom -explaining its customs, praising its govern­
mental organization, admiring its military, describing its religious prac­
tices, and lauding its rulers. Yet no one today disputes the essential verac­
ity upon which the stereotypes of savagery were based. Dahomey was 
a central player in the overseas slave trade from West Africa. [n addition 
to a standing army of men, there were women soldiers in the kingdom's 
armed forces, at least in the nineteenth century. Despite the perpetuation 
of a myth of Greek antiquity by many, the women soldiers did not cut 
off either breast. Some captives of war were sold overseas, others were 
kept as domestic slaves within the kingdom, and yet others were sacri­
ficed at ceremonies honoring the ancestors of the royal family. However, 
there were no lakes of blood, and cannibalism was never more than a 
rurnor. Religion in Dahomey was focused on gods who were taken by 
slaves to the New World; there, the religion was called voodoo, a corrup-

--- Page 20 ---
Along the Slave Coast 
3 
tion of vodun, the Dahomean word for deity. The palace of the king was 
surrounded by a massive wall, which at one period in history was deco­
rated with human skulls, as was the throne of one of the kings. And the 
kings did have many wives who, along with a much smaller number of 
eunuchs, inhabited a citylike palace. But what visitors saw as intrigue 
tended to be the actions of women and eunuchs as they performed their 
roles as officials in the governments of the kings. And the mass of Daho­
means were not slaves but citizens in a hierarchic structure of family and 
state relations and obligations. 
Even when stripped of moralizing and racist condemnations, Daho­
mey appears to the Western eye exotic at best. Yet exoticism is always in 
the eyes of the beholder, the outsider whose own culture must appear 
equally strange to the exotic. Certainly, by the human-rights standards of 
the late twentieth century, Dahomey is worthy of criticism. On the other 
hand, compared with the practices of many nations both past and pres­
ent, Dahomey as a state functioned reasonably well. It guaranteed its citi­
zens basic rights and access to means of livelihood, providing order and 
protection while demanding specific responsibilities. Dahomeans were 
able to meet their fundamental material and spiritual needs, producing 
reasonably abundant surpluses of foodstuffs and crafted goods while hav­
ing access to imported goods and the stimulation of outside cultural con­
tacts. Though slaves traded into the kingdom and captives of war might 
be condemned into the overseas trade or executed in the name of the 
state religion, the kingdom's leadership paradoxically showed great re­
spect in principle for human life, and carefully controlled the taking of 
life. In short, Dahomey was neither a state that terrorized its citizens, nor 
a Garden of Eden whose citizens enjoyed an idyllic existence. 
This book explores the political culture of Dahomey over nearly two 
hundred years of the kingdom's autonomous existence, from approxi­
mately 1700 to the imposition of French colonial authority in 1894. It 
traces cultural, economic, and political changes over time and focuses on 
the changing composition of the coalitions of persons who ruled Daho­
mey in the name of the kings. It argues that those cultural characteristics 
that appear to us as oddities-and that were once seen as the bizarre 
customs of an uncivilized nation-were logical developments of cultural

--- Page 21 ---
i 
A(ong the Slave Coast 
AFRJCA 
1. Dahomey and the Slave 
Coast. Conlemporary na· 
tion·states in al capilal 
letters; precolonial states 
and cities in upper- and 
lowercase. Shaded area is 
estimated greatest extent 
of Dahomey 
traits found elsewhere in West Africa. Dahomey presents a changing pic­
ture of how people organize human society, of how a nation comes to be, 
and of what rulers do to gain and maintain power. In short, what seems 
to have been unique in Dahomey will often be found to be an intensifi­
cation of common practices, or subtle alterations in institutions known 
elsewhere among Dahomey's West African neighbors. 
This study of Dahomey differs in many respects from recent studies 
in African, Dahomean, and women's history. Histories of kingdoms and 
their rulers were much in vogue in the 1960s, the period when most con­
temporary African nation-states gained their independence. The early 
studies that glorified states were gradually replaced by social histories and 
analyses of class structures, with emphases on peasantries. Women took 
their place among the oppressed subjects of scholarly scrutiny, and by the 
mid-1970S attention had turned to the colonial and postcolonial periods. 
This work returns to a consideration of a precolonial state and the people 
who controlled it. It is in that sense a history from the point of view of 
rulers. But it argues that there was a constantly changing set of persons 
who reached for and gained power in Dahomey, a set of persons that 
varied by gender, status, ethnic group, and lineage origin. Thus it might

--- Page 22 ---
Along the Slave Coast 
5 
be described as a social history of ruling coalitions. Women and men 
of varying kin origins and social strata interacted at the political center of 
Dahomey through more than two centuries of history-as the kingdom 
expanded, as relations of commerce and production changed, as Oaho­
mean society borrowed and adapted social and cultural forms from 
neighbors, and as the kingdom carried out war, diplomacy, and trade 
with other nations. This flow of historical events in turn reveals patterns 
of the intersection of gender, kinship, and class that highlight how power 
and authority were gained, were exercised, and were lost over the life of 
the kingdom. 
This book highlights women as players in the history of Dahomey's 
ruling elite, exploring their changing opportunities for autonomous ac­
tion over the course of two hundred years of Dahomean history. In con­
trast to what has become a widely accepted vision of precolonial Africa, 
it does not argue that Dahomean (or African) culture was fundamentally 
patriarchal and oppressive to women. Rather, it finds women exercising 
choice, influence, and autonomy, if not in wholly egalitarian relationships 
with men, in situations where there was dear recognition of their ability 
and right to do so. It goes beyond previous studies of precolonial African 
women by tracing the transformation of their powers chronologically 
and placing women's experience in a broader context that informs and 
is informed by the history of the kingdom as a whole. It argues that 
women's status changed over time in precolonial Dahomey, that women 
experienced a loss of acknowledged authority and power not unlike the 
losses demonstrated by scholars for African women during the colonial 
period. In the case of Dahomey, however, changes in women's status were 
related to cultural and economic factors more complex than simply the 
imposition of European mores. At the same time, this is much more than 
a history of women. It goes beyond women's history to explore larger 
questions of the state, its nature, and how male and female individuals 
were involved in shaping it. 
Finally, this study is unusual in showing changes in the institutions of 
a precolonial African state. Scholarly analyses of precolonial African state 
structures have tended to present a static picture, sometimes tracing the 
origins of institutions but otherwise implying litde change over time once

--- Page 23 ---
6 
Along the Slave Coast 
an office or function of state had been established. This work focuses on 
development and change in two overlapping institutions of the Daho­
mean state. the monarchy and the palace. It uses the practice of religion 
in part as a lens through which to focus on change. It revisits a number 
of important issues long debated in Dahomean historiography about the 
nature of the state: about succession patterns, the organization of offices. 
militarism, the origins of the ruling lineage, the slave trade. the transition 
to the trade in palm oil. and the ultimate decline of Dahomey. 
The remainer of this chapter includes two parts. The first develops a 
snapshot of Dahomean political culture as it existed in the late nineteenth 
century. It focuses on the monarchy and the palace. the instruments 
through which state power was exercised. In doing so. the snapshot of 
necessity deals with some of the assumptions and cultural values upon 
which institutions of state were based. The second part introduces 
sources for the history of Dahomey, the people whose voices. motives. 
and misconceptions we will use to create a moving picture of Dahomey 
over the years. 
Power, the Monarchy, and the Palace ,.",. 
Both precolonial observers and twentieth-century scholars have debated 
the mechanisms of power and control in Dahomey. Apologists for the 
slave trade, for example, describe the king as an absolutist despot wield­
ing arbitrary power over a hapless population that would have been better 
off under plantation slavery. Typical was the French observer who com­
ments that "the king of the Dahomeans rules with oriental despotism. 
His ministers only appear before him covered with dust or mud. They 
prostrate while receiving his orders. Without trial, without forms of jus­
tice, he has the heads of blacks cut off when he is displeased with them." I 
Abolitionists similarly saw a despot, but one made so by the evils of the 
slave trade. More frequently, travelers and scholars have posited a balance 
of power, arguing that the king was checked by a class of nobles or power­
ful priests. Stanley Diamond theorizes a struggle between a civil state and 
the power of kinship groups. Kar! Polanyi sees a two-tier system in which 
power was exercised over external relations by an authoritarian monarch 
and "freedom and autonomy" were left to the masses in the countryside.

--- Page 24 ---
Along the Slave Coast 
7 
Maurice Ahanhanzo Glele. stressing the importance of hierarchical rela­
tions, argues that all power was concentrated in the hands of the king and 
the roya1 family, so that the history of the kingdom is essentially the story 
of the royal family. Eighteenth-century Europeans sometimes argue that 
women played an important role in power relations. whereas twentieth­
century writers tend to deny that women exercised any power: "effec­
tively, they {women in the palace 1 had no active role in the government 
and no influence whatsoever on the mind of the king." 1 Al of these 
conceptions paint a picture of an individual monarch working alone to 
establish relations of competition or cooperation with individuals or with 
groupings of individuals. 
I propose a slightly different conception of power in Dahomey. I argue 
that power in Dahomey was diffuse and multifaceted, and was exercised 
by coalitions of individuals whose membership changed over time. Those 
coalitions that succeeded in gaining control of the state will be called 
here the "monarchy." The monarchy thus is a metaphor for a small and 
fluid political and economic elite; one of its members was the man who 
reigned as king and in whose name the country was governed. The mon­
archy was typically made up of men and women from differing lineages 
and strata of Dahomean society, all of whom wielded various powers­
at times in concert and at times at cross-purposes-and who acted from 
a variety of motives. Al of the individuals who constituted the monarchy 
were loyal to the person of the king, in the sense that their continued 
access to power was individually dependent upon him. Yet collectively 
they could act in face of the king's opposition. The grouping of indi­
viduals who constituted the monarchy was constantly reworked in light 
of changes internal and external to the kingdom. 
At the same time. the king himself was neither a prisoner nor a puppet 
of his monarchy. No one became king of Dahomey through a simple 
accident of birth. Rather, the king was one of a small group of sons of 
a king, born after his father had been recognized as heir or enstooled as 
king. A man of ambition, the prince who became king proved his worth 
and earned his office through building alliances with siblings. with im­
portant common men, and with powerful women within the household 
of the reigning king. 
The women involved in the monarchy were nearly always drawn from

--- Page 25 ---
8 
Along the Slave Coast 
the palace, a term used here, as it was in Dahomey, to refer both to royal 
edifices and to the persons who inhabited them. By the late nineteenth 
century, the palace as institution included an estimated eight thousand 
persons who lived in a series of royal residences across the kingdom. 
The vast majority were women, though there were also some eunuchs. 
Al persons associated with the palace were termed ahosi (aho = king; 
si = dependent, follower, subordinate), or wives of the king. All were 
involved in the administration of the kingdom, working for the advance­
ment of the monarchy's interests in a polygynous household that was 
simultaneously the state's administrative arm. The women of the palace 
were a cross section of Dahomean society; they included slaves and war 
captives, freeborn commoners, and women from well-to-do households. 
Also resident within the palace, or closely allied to it, were princesses, 
or ahovi (aho = king; vi = child). Ahovi is a term that refers to all in­
dividuals, male or female, whose father was a prince. Birth-rank gave 
certain female ahovi the authority to exercise power within the royallin­
eage. For example, ahovi who were eldest daughters or senior sisters of 
reigning kings at times were centrally involved in the selection of kings 
and in their installation. Though royal privilege gave ahovi special status 
in Dahomean society, the distinction between princess and wife, between 
ahovi and ahosi, sometimes blurred. For example, kings often married 
princesses of royal lines descended from their predecessors. And in the 
late nineteenth century, some sisters to the reigning king became promi­
nent members of the palace and hence wives of the king. A few princesses 
had a significant impact on the history of Dahomey independent of any 
relationship with the palace. For the most part, though, it was through 
the palace that women, ahovi or commoner, had the greatest potential 
for gaining and exercising authority and power. 
Certain ahosi exercised extraordinary power as part of the monarchy, 
and typically they were titled state officers. They and other ambitious 
wives of the king competed for influence through building power bases 
within the palace, working to serve the king or to assist princes who 
were seeking to become king. Their ethnic, class, and kin backgrounds 
changed over time, and the powers that they effectively wielded changed. 
They included both ahosi and ahovi, both king's wives and princesses.

--- Page 26 ---
Along the Slave Coast 
9 
The palace, then. was both the king's household, a city of women who 
carried out the king's orders, and a part of the policy· making apparatus 
of the state. An ideology of meritocracy promised promotion to al 
women of ambition and achievement. though they entered the hierar­
chical ranks of the palace according to their social status of origin. Belief 
in advancement through merit and the importance of hierarchy were not 
unique to the palace. Both appear to have run deeply through Dahomean 
history, and were still visible in the twentieth century. 
The Palace as Place 
The palace was a spatial entity as well as a political, economic, and social 
institution. Its center was in the capital city of Abomey and its periphery 
in royal residences located at strategic points throughout the country. 
The central palace complex in Abomey was the formal residence of the 
king, his reign-mate, and their courts; as such, it was also the residence 
of a large proportion of the ahosi population. In actuality, the central 
Abomey palace was a series of royal residences, with each new section 
constructed adjacent to its predecessor by each succeeding king. By the 
late nineteenth century, it covered nearly one hundred acres of land. It 
was surrounded by a massive mud wall rising in some places to thirty feet 
and describing a perimeter of nearly two and a half miles. Inside, tombs 
of the kings were located in the order of their reigns along a curve run­
ning clockwise from northwest to southeast, reflecting the building of 
each successive palace section.' Comparable memorial shrines to the 
kpojito, the kings' female reign-mates, were ranged from northwest to 
southwest along the western portion of the enclosure. The reigning king 
always occupied the latest portion to be built. To his west were the quar­
ters of his kpojito and her entourage. The remainder of the city-sized 
palace population appears to have lived throughout al areas of the palace 
complex. 
The central Abomey palace was the seat of government in Dahomey 
and the kingdom's political and religious center. Control over it and its 
inhabitants was the absolute prerequisite to control over the kingdom. It 
was in public at the palace that policies were made and sacrifices exe­
cuted, that wars were planned and rituals performed, and that appoint-

--- Page 27 ---
10 
Along the Slave Coast 
Palace of 
A 
.... 
• 
• • 
Tombof 
Wegbaftl 
Tomb of 
Aglljll 
North 
T""'of 
Tegbellu 
• 
• • 
2. The Palace of Abomey at the end of the nineteenth century 
House of 
ments were confirmed and taxes paid. In the privacy of its inner courts, 
records were kept, treasures were guarded, kings were advised, princes 
and princesses were conceived, and thousands of tasks in support of the 
monarchy were performed. 
It was mainly in the Abomey palace that the king received his male

--- Page 28 ---
Afong the stave Coast 
/ 1  
ministers and governors, along with visiting diplomats and commercia1 
representatives, al of whom otherwise resided outside. As described in 
the nineteenth century, the large, inner courtyard for audiences with the 
king was divided in two by a row of midribs of palm branches. The king 
and his immediate entourage remained on one side, obscured under the 
low. thatched roof of a long verandah. Outsiders to the palace would wait 
on the opposite side of the palm-branch boundary, facing the palace-as­
organization: a sole man surrounded by thousands of women and a num­
ber of eunuchs. 
The pa1m branches described a line that was both sexual and political. 
It underscored the king's control over his women's sexuality and, because 
ahosi were drawn from al lineages in the kingdom, it stood by extension 
for royal control over the entire population. The line also underscored 
the palace as a separate and secret organization, a virtual city of women 
experienced in the mechanics of government who, from an outsider's 
perspective, were capable of blocking or promoting outsiders' interests. 
Dahomeans summoned to the king's presence moved to the palm-branch 
line, prostrated there, and spoke to a woman called the daklo. She con­
veyed their words to the king. The spatial arrangement distanced and 
mystified the person of the king and his entourage-and made literal 
a truism shared by European visitors, that to gain access to the king, one 
must work through the women of the palace. 
The divided courtyard pointed to another reality of nineteenth­
century government in Dahomey. It expressed spatially a fundamental 
ideological and organizational principle, that any whole is made up of 
complementary parts: insidefoutside, rightfleft, royalfcommoner, malef 
female. The palace was the center of a universe that was the kingdom of 
Dahomey, but it was a center that balanced the interests of a periphery, a 
complementary "outside." Dress reinforced the contrast between outside 
and inside. Eunuchs appeared in palace audiences in women's dress, sig­
naling their responsibility for activities of the inside. In contrast, women 
whose function was to oversee the male ministers of state wore agbada, 
men's gowns in Yoruba style, which pointed to their responsibility for 
functions on the outside. The ideology of complementarity was strikingly 
visible. However, it was a complementarity of parts of unequal status: 
inside outranked outside, right took precedence over left, and royal

--- Page 29 ---
1 2  
Along the Slave Coast 
superseded commoner. Gender complementarity was more complex. On 
the level of popular culture, male was superior to female, though as part 
of the palace, women took precedence over men. 
The palace was also the site of the ritual processes that legitimized the 
dynasty. The well·being of the kingdom was dependent upon the con· 
tinued support of the deceased kings and their reign·mates, who needed 
to be honored at their palace shrines at regular intervals. Ceremonies 
designed to honor the royal ancestors were noted by visitors to the region 
of Dahomey from early in the eighteenth century. Called Annual Cus· 
toms by Europeans, the cycle of ceremonies grew increasingly elaborate 
over time. Nineteenth-century accounts, when mass public portions of 
Customs took place at Singboji, a broad triangular plaza fronting the 
two-story palace entrance, describe human and animal sacrifices, parades 
of the riches of the king, military demonstrations, political debates, and 
mutual gift.giving between the king and the population. Early in his 
reign, a new king was also required to perform particularly elaborate 
ceremonies in the palace in honor of his predecessor. These Grand Cus· 
toms constituted the final funeral for the preceding king and the formal 
installation of his successor. They linked the new king spiritually to the 
dynasty and ensured the kingdom's continued growth and prosperity. It 
was only after the completion of Grand Customs that a king was believed 
to be legitimate in the eyes of his ancestors, because "the king did not 
owe his title only to his birth: as long as he had not completed the cere· 
monies in honor of his father, he was not truly linked to the dynasty. An 
Abomean explained the relationship saying 'it is not enough that a king 
have a proper relationship with the living, he must also establish a correct 
relationship with the dead.'" 4 
Annual Customs and Grand Customs were directed to both the liv· 
ing and the dead. They spoke to the royal ancestors, offering them the 
nourishment of sacrifice and the strength of recognition through prayer. 
The king's ancestors in turn were expected to respond by assisting their 
progeny. But Customs spoke equally strongly to Dahomeans who were 
not of the royal lineage. In their lavishness and their use of human sac· 
rifice, they impressed upon all others the supremacy of the royal line. 
Moreover, because annual ceremonies for ancestors in other Dahomean

--- Page 30 ---
Along rhe Slave Coast 
13 
lineages could not be performed prior to the king's, they underlined royal 
control over the kingdom and its population. 
The displays of military power and material riches at Customs re­
minded al that the monarchy and the resources it commanded were 
paramount in Dahomey. Military power was directly linked to the eco­
nomic well-being of Dahomey. It allowed the kingdom to expand the 
territory under its control and to obtain the productive human resources 
needed to participate in external commerce, most specifically in the slave 
and palm-oil trades. The debates on political and military decisions re­
inforced the importance of the palace as a point for policy formation 
while allowing the tensions of factional viewpoints to be aired and to 
some extent resolved. 
Those who attended Customs-heads of lineages and villages, gov­
ernors of provinces. merchants, and ministers of state-presented gifts 
that are called tribute or taxes by writers on Dahomey. The givers in turn 
received gifts from the king. Gifts or taxes were dearly a major source of 
revenue for the monarchy. but they were also symbolic recognition of a 
patron-dient relationship between the monarch and his Dahomean sub­
jects. Echoing the relationship of the king to his ancestors, Dahomeans 
recognized and enriched a powerful patron, the king. who in turn owed 
them protection and support. Customs thus made visible the three inter­
woven threads of power that legitimized the rulers of Dahomey: reli­
gious/ideological, military, and political/economic. 
Ol Hierarchy. Merit, and Access to Power 
A strong sense of hierarchy meant that individuals within any social 
structure could always find their rank, which they were then expected 
to respect. For example, the order of birth established hierarchy among 
children within families. and the order of arrival in a household fixed 
hierarchy among wives. No two individuals ever occupied the same rank. 
Everywhere, the first to arrive, by birth or marriage, outranked al who 
came later. Not even twins were equal. for the secondborn was con­
sidered the elder. Hierarchy promoted a respect for authority that was 
evident inside and outside the palace; in fact. it was to last beyond the 
lifetime of the kingdom. The French in the twentieth century found

--- Page 31 ---
1 4  
Along the Slave Coast 
the region of Abomey easy to govern, with a population disinclined to 
rebel against colonial authority and willing to provide taxes and labor 
as required. Typical was the missionary resident in Abomey in the early 
twentieth century who looked around him and saw "everywhere a hier­
archic society well ordered and disciplined: masters and servants under­
stand their duties and rights." ¯ 
Cross-cutting strict hierarchy was a belief that individuals could rise 
in status through merit. With hard work, skill, and support from spiritual 
forces, an individual could win wealth and higher status. For some, mer­
cantile success, particularly at the port ofWhydah, proved an avenue for 
advancement. Material success was also linked to service to the monar­
chy. Both males and females who performed well and loyally in service to 
the king were rewarded appropriately. The impact of success on hierarchy 
can best be seen in the structures of kinship. 
There were three levels of kin organization. Clans included all persons 
who traced their ancestry to a mythical being, usually a wild animal, 
which was the clan tohwiyo (to 
= agent; hwiyo = worshipped, offered 
libations). Clans were relatively few in number and had little practical 
impact on kin relations. Instead, lineages, the subdivisions of clans, were 
the key kinship organizations. Each lineage traced its ancestry back to a 
given historical individual. Titular lineage leadership was in the hands of 
the oldest man and woman, whose responsibilities were both secular and 
ritual. Major decisions affecting al lineage members-access to land, 
negotiations of marriage, honoring of ancestors-were taken at the level 
of the lineage. Households constituted the third level of kinship organi­
zation. They were groupings of lineage members and persons attached to 
the lineage who lived in a single compound; that is, a series of contiguous 
dwellings on lineage-controlled land. Household heads might be male 
or female, though men served most often as head. Marriage was strictly 
patrilocal, and ancestry was traced through patrilineal lines, with one ex­
ception. The royal lineage claimed al children born to any of its mem­
bers, whether female or male. 
Hierarchy within a lineage, as noted above, was based on rank. Rank 
was an ascribed characteristic related to the length of time any person 
had heen a member of a particular lineage. It afected persons born into 
the group, married into it, or brought into it as slaves or other subordi-

--- Page 32 ---
Along the Slave Coast 
15 
nates. Material success, however, created nodes of wealth and prestige 
within a given lineage-households where resources were greater, de­
pendents more numerous, and status higher. Though ranked hierarchi­
cally by chronological factors, then, people within lineages also were 
divided by socioeconomic strata. A wealthy individual would show ap­
propriate deference to those of higher rank within the lineage, yet within 
the kingdom's political system, wealth and a close relationship to the 
monarchy placed that individual-and members of his or her house­
hold-on higher social strata than lineage members who might other­
wise outrank them. In short, a class system based on achieved status ex­
isted across kinship lines. 
The belief that an individual could rise in social status through merit 
applied to women not only as members of the lineage of their birth but 
also as wives in their husbands' households. A woman at the time of her 
marriage moved into the household of her husband. Her deportment 
there could aid or destroy her own children's chances to win lineage office 
and, in the case of exemplary behavior, could allow her to rise to the 
status of honored ancestor in her husband's lineage. Merit as an avenue 
for women's advancement in the palace was underlined ideologically by 
stories of the rise of slaves to the position of kpojito, reign-mate to the 
king and the highest-ranking woman in the kingdom. 
Married Dahomean women expected to assist a husband in his en­
deavors, but also to earn income that was neither controlled by nor in­
herited by him. Palace women similarly worked at a variety of tasks on 
behalf of themselves and of the king. They were farmers, food processors, 
traders, porters, artisans, ritual specialists, and healers. In contrast with 
other Dahomean women, however, ahosi also worked for the state as 
guards, soldiers, messengers, spies, prostitutes, performers, political ad­
visors, ministers of state, governmental record keepers, and makers of 
state policy. They were rewarded by the king for these services with cash. 
cloth, slaves, land, and control over villages, al of which could contribute 
to a substantial estate to be left to relatives in the fumilies of their birth. 
Because distinctions were not made between domestic functions per­
formed in the name of the king as head of household and state functions 
performed in the name of the king as head of state, many of the activi­
ties of members of the palace had implications for national policy and

--- Page 33 ---
16 
Along the Slave Coast 
administration. In effect, the palace was at one and the same time a 
polygynous household and the central administrative institution of the 
state. And on the highest levels of this institution, women of talent 
and ambition enjoyed extraordinary opportunities for the acquisition of 
wealth and the exercise of power. 
Of Kinship and Power 
The Dahomean monarchy faced constant problems of state integration. 
Dahomey was an expansionist kingdom bent on conquering and incor­
porating land and populations in every direction from Abomey. To func­
tion, it needed to win and keep the allegiance of people at the center who 
would cooperate militarily, economically, and politically in the monar­
chy's goals. With each new conquest, Dahomey had to integrate peoples 
from out1ying areas, allowing the older center to benefit from the spoils 
of conquest yet incorporating captured land and people into the state 
and ultimately making them part of the center. The mechanisms of state 
control directly paralleled principles of social and kin relations. Kinship 
structures were recognizable in state institutions, and political links be­
tween individuals were established through the idiom of kinship. In this 
sense, the state seemed little more than a lineage writ large, operating 
under principles widely used and respected in Dahomey and in neigh­
boring areas. But even while invoking principles of kin and commoner 
society, the monarchy distorted their function and meaning, and thus 
transformed social and kin relations into devices for the exercise and 
consolidation of state power. 
Kinship met many fundamental human needs at the same time that it 
made strong economic and emotional claims on its members. In that 
sense it competed with the state for individuals' allegiance. For example. 
Dahomeans could look to their patrilineage for basic shelter, protection. 
and nurturance. along with access to land and training in artisan or other 
economic skills. The patrilineage identified the ancestral spirit who was 
responsible for each member's birth and consulted the ancestors as nec­
essary when members were ill or needed to make major decisions. The 
patrilineage found spouses for its members and helped them rear their 
children. At death it ushered its members into the world of the spirits and 
then took responsibility for their eternal well-being by "feeding" them at

--- Page 34 ---
Along the Slave Coast 
1 7  
regular intervals. In return, individuals were expected to accede to the 
lineage's demands, providing personal services and material support to it 
and, if necessary. subordinating personal desires and fulfillment to lin­
eage obligations. A woman's obligations in marriage to the lineage of her 
husband were finite and temporary; it was the patrilineage of her birth 
that would call on her services in old age, would house her if she chose to 
return home, and would be responsible for her burial. Individuals, living 
and dead, had foremost obligations to the patrilineage. They literally re­
ceived life and livelihood through its good offices; their loyalty of neces­
sity lay with their patrilineage. 
The kingdom of Dahomey did not attempt to take over the functions 
of the patrilineage. Indeed, the state offered Dahomeans complementary 
forms of sustenance: protection at a national level, security for travel, 
. expanded land area, and opportunities to participate in long-distance 
commercial relations. Lineage authorities and the kingdom's officials did 
not necessarily agree, however. on details of how the state could and 
would work with lineages. And dependents of the king, even if they were 
among the privileged elite that made up the monarchy, were forced to 
balance the demands of their participation in the machinery of state with 
the imperatives of their membership in kin groups. Ahosi who were of 
slave origin were theoretically without direct family connections. From 
the perspective of the monarchy, they did not have competing loyalties 
to families of their birth, and they were thus more to be trusted. Yet 
because even slave ahosi were guaranteed the product of their industry, 
slaves could be personally ambitious, driven to found a household or 
even a new lineage based on the wealth they amassed. Other ahosi came 
from Dahomean lineages; as such, they remained in reasonably close 
touch with relatives and might strive to use the palace to enrich their 
lineage. Many ahosi represented, then, the interests of people other than 
members of the royal lineage. At times, and in part because of their lack 
of kinship with royalty, relatively large numbers of them appear to have 
shared similar perspectives on policy questions. Nevertheless, the women 
of the king's household did not represent a unified power block. 
Though the state did not initially usurp lineage rights and responsi­
bilities, it did adopt the language of kin relations, using it to serve as a 
series of models and metaphors for institutions of the state and for the

--- Page 35 ---
J 8 
Along the Slave Coast 
obligations of its subjects. To the extent that it was successful, the state 
reduced the autonomy of Dahomean lineages in favor of greater central 
control. The palace, for example. echoed the organization of polygy­
nous households common throughout Dahomey. Wives in any house­
hold were dependents and subordinates who owed loyalty and service to 
the lineage of their husband. Wealth was based on control over labor 
power. and a large polygynous household expressed a fundamental prin­
ciple of society. that wealth was measured in numbers of dependents. In 
Dahomey, the king by definition was the wealthiest individual in the 
kingdom. It was to be expected that he would maintain large numbers 
of wives. The palace was thus a polygynous household writ large, but it 
functioned in ways that distorted the meaning of marriage as practiced 
in Dahomey. 
Marriage was nonnally an alliance between lineages, and the wife who 
moved into her husband's patrilinea1 home represented the provisions 
of the alliance. She established through her behavior the grounds for 
continued interlineage cooperation. Marriages were arranged by lineage 
leaders, with at least the tacit approval of the individuals who would be­
come husband and wife. Marriage to the king, on the other hand. was 
effected in a number of ways, only one of which included the kind of 
interlineage links that characterized normal Dahomean practices: some 
women entered the palace as captives of war, others were recruited 
through levies on Dahomean lineages. and still others were sent there as 
punishment for misbehavior; but well-to-do lineages sometimes offered 
daughters to the king, and this provided the closest parallel to the mean­
ing of marriage between nonroyallineages. Outside the royal line. the gift 
of a daughter to another lineage was an egalitarian gesture that would 
normally be reciprocated; a daughter of the recipient lineage would be 
offered to the giver lineage. At the level of the palace, the offer of a woman 
to the king confirmed lines of subordination. Such a woman was the gift 
of a client to a patron, a symbol of the expectation that such a gift would 
reinforce links of loyalty and obligation. 
Once within the palace, ahosi lacked the rights and protections en­
joyed by women in normal Dabomean marriage. Their entry into the 
palace was permanent. Unlike wives in commoner marriages, they could

--- Page 36 ---
Along the Slave Coast 
J 9 
not appeal to their lineages should they be mistreated, nor could they 
move back to their patrilineal homes to protest poor treatment. Divorce, 
otherwise a reasonably common option for women, was simply not pos­
sible when one's husband was the king. Relatively few ahosi ever became 
sexual partners of any monarch. Since procreation was the avowed pur­
pose of marriage, and a lack of sexual access to a spouse was grounds for 
divorce. most palace women were in reality retainers rather than wives of 
the king. 
Wives in polygynous households were ranked according to the date 
of their arrival in their husband's home. In the palace, women were 
integrated at levels that reflected the social strata from which they were 
drawn. Changes in rank would be earned, at least in theory, as women 
demonstrated their 10yaJty to the king and worked to further the interests 
of the monarchy. Royal marriage thus acknowledged and reinforced class 
relations. Those who had been privileged by origin began their palace 
lives in privileged positions, with control over resources that gave them 
greater opportunity to advance themselves and the interests of their own 
patrilineages. The palace thus distorted the meaning of marriage, and 
in the place of alliances between lineages conveyed messages of central 
power and control. Marriage to the king was an idiom that in fact spoke 
of royal control over al lineages in Dahomey. In this sense, palace women 
were a metaphor for the position of nonroyai lineages, legaJly subordi­
nate to the monarchy as wives were legaJly subordinate to husbands. 
Fostering was common in Dahomey, as young people from poorer 
branches of lineages might be sent to the households of more well-ta-do 
kinspeople to serve and possibly prosper from opportunities in a wealth­
ier household. Thus the homes of people of importance, and the ranks 
of the palace itself, were augmented by the poor relatives of success­
ful and powerful people in what were effectively client-patron relations 
among kinspersons. Ambitious youth. too, attached themselves to per­
sons perceived as powerful in client-patron relations that mimicked the 
mutuaJ obligations of kinship. A French colonial official in Abomey in 
1935, for example, observed that Dahomean chiefs had large families and 
lots of "parasites" working the chiefs' fields.6 
The monarchy also constructed personaJ political relationships in

--- Page 37 ---
20 
Along the Slave Coast 
tenns of principles drawn directly from marital, kin, and client ties. As 
noted above, all women of the palace were technically wives of the king, 
even though their relationship to the monarch did not fulfill the obliga­
tions of marriage as practiced in Dahomey. The kings also "married" 
men. Prominent artisans and talented leaders from newly conquered 
areas were integrated into Dahomey through ties based on the idiom of 
marriage. Along with eunuchs and women of the palace, such men were 
called ahosi. Male ahosi brought families with them or were granted 
women and slaves with which to establish a line. However, the lineages 
that they founded through gifts from their kingly "husband" legally came 
under the control of the royal line. Lost was the autonomy of indepen­
dent lineages to move, to contract marriage alliances, or to make funda­
mental decisions about their future. Metaphors of marriage, then, linked 
the king to thousands of women and men, but they evoked relationships 
of subordination without protection that emphasized the loyalty and re­
sponsibil ities expected of the subordinate party, the ahosi. 
Individual Dahomeans could also forge close connections with per­
sons outside their direct kinship connections or even outside their lin­
eages that cross-cut the hierarchy of birth rank and kin position. A form 
of oath taking created links between persons of different patrilineages 
that supplanted even the ties between siblings of the same mother. At its 
simplest level, the oath would allow two friends to pledge lifelong support 
to each other. The oath created fictive kinship, but with ties that were 
meant to be stronger than kin. It was guaranteed by the invoking of di­
vine sanction; a friend who betrayed his sibling-by-oath would be killed 
by a god. At the level of the monarchy, kings and would-be kings dis­
torted the meaning of friendship cemented by oath by using oaths to 
build political relationships and coalitions. Perhaps the most famous of 
these political oaths was the one that linked the man who became King 
Gew to an Afro-Brazilian slave trader, Francisco Felix de Souza. Gew 
was said to have taken the oath with de Souza while the trader was im­
prisoned in Abomey. After escaping with Gezo's help, de Souza supplied 
the material goods that enabled the prince to build the coalition that in 
about 1818 carried out a successful coup to make Gezo king.7 
At least in the nineteenth century. the kings also used oaths to ensure

--- Page 38 ---
Along the Slave Coast 
2 1  
the loyalty ofIow-ranking subordinates. Prior to making war, the Daho­
means would send spies to potential enemy territory; the monarchy 
forced each spy to make an oath with the king. As in the case of institu­
tions, the monarchy used the common idiom of personal relationships 
to develop associations in the interests of the state. If all went well, those 
persons linked to the king received ample material rewards, but at a price. 
There was no guarantee that a monarchy strengthened through the rela­
tionship would remain faithful to the principles upon which those per­
sonal relationships were based. In Dahomey, then, in theory kin links 
were paramount, but in fact marriage, client-patron alliances, and oaths 
allowed a certain flexibility and fluidity in relationships between people 
of differing statuses. 
Annual Customs were in their religious essence a ritual performed 
each year by every lineage. Gift-giving at Customs-or, in scholarly 
terms, the "redistributive" nature of Customs-was not a unique cre­
ation of the Dahomean monarchs. Heads of lineages always oversaw the 
collection of gifts from family members and the bestowal of largess as 
part of annual lineage ceremonies. Like the royal line, nonroyal lineages 
used the setting of their annual homage to the ancestors to discuss family 
business and to make collective decisions about lineage leadership. At 
the level of the monarchy, Annual Customs mimicked but also violated 
the meaning of ceremonies in honor of the ancestors. By requiring the 
representation of the entire population, and the payment of taxes at that 
time, the monarchy used the ceremonial cycle as an integrative device 
for the state. The message of Customs was that the well-being of the 
royal line and the well-being of the kingdom were synonymous, and 
that the entire population had the same obligations to the monarchy that 
they had to their own kinspeople. Customs supported the fiction of a 
commonality of interests among all Dahomeans, even as it attempted to 
undermine the realities of kinship. 
Of Religion and Power 
From the perspective of the monarchy, the religious life of the kingdom 
was paradoxically an opportunity for the state to centralize power and a 
threat to central control. Thousands of spiritual beings-vodun-were

--- Page 39 ---
22 
Along the Slave Coast 
recognized in the precolonial period. Al vodun can be classified into 
one of two categories: those that were associated with lineages and those 
that were not. Religion at the level of the lineage linked kinspeople to 
their deified ancestors. to the vodun that had founded their clan, and. 
by the nineteenth century, to powerful and dangerous spirits born into 
their families in the form of deformed children. But individuals could 
also participate in extrafamilial congregations associated with the so­
called popular vodun. deities often linked to forces of nature. Popular 
vodun might be worshipped over relatively large areas that crossed polit­
ical boundaries, and might include followers of different nations and 
ethnic groups. In Dahomey. many popular vodun were derivative gods 
imported from Yoruba-speaking country to the east: Gu, the god of 
iron. Legba, the divine trickster, and Heviosso, the god of thunder, for 
example. 
Religious practice in Dahomey was pragmatic and eclectic. The ulti­
mate test of a vodun. whether ancestral or popular, was its efficacy. If a 
god delivered-allowed a barren woman to conceive, protected a man 
on a long and dangerous journey, led a hunter to game, cured a sick 
child-it deserved prayer and sacrifice. It would be heeded when it de­
manded that a member of the lineage become its devotee, or vodunsi 
(wife, or follower, of the vodun). Dahomeans were always on the alert for 
deities of proven capability. A vodun that worked well for another com­
munity would be welcomed. Immigrants, including war captives, often 
carried their vodun with them and installed them in Dahomey. Daho­
means were sometimes sent to neighboring areas to be trained as priests 
of new gods. Vodun even arrived as spoils of war. 
But vodun. whether deified ancestors or independent spirit beings, did 
not work mechanically to fil all requests of their followers. Vodun were 
believed to be linked to humanity through complex relationships of mu­
tual interdependence. Al vodun inhabited Kutome (literally, the land of 
the dead), a kingdom of shadows that exactly mirrored the visible world 
of human beings. The royal dynasty reigned in both worlds, and lin­
eages and their members enjoyed the same relative status and wealth in 
Kutome as their kinspeople in the visible world. Birth and death were 
passage points from one world to the other; communications between 
the two were maintained through prayer and divination. Ancestors in

--- Page 40 ---
Along the Slave Coast 
23 
Kutome were ranked hierarchically according to their date of arrival, just 
as children in the visible world were ranked according to the date of their 
birth. Each world could affect the other. If angered or neglected, the an­
cestors or other vodun could injure or kil humans; alternatively, they 
could bless people with success in business, a bountiful harvest, or large 
numbers of healthy children. The living could also modify the well-being 
of those in Kutome: a woman enriched by the king raised the status of 
her ancestors; if, as sometimes happened, the king stripped a powerful 
man of his title, seized his lands, and made his wives and daughters ser­
vants in the palace, the ancestors were similarly reduced.8 Vodun who 
were not regularly worshipped and nourished gradually weakened; an­
cestors would cease to exist if a lineage had no more living members to 
venerate them. 
Like other Dahomeans, the kings believed in the efficacy of the gods 
and recognized the need to harness their power. The monarchy needed 
spiritual backing to assist in governing, to assure victory in warfare, to 
punish enemies, to make the earth fertile, and to ensure the king's health. 
The successes of the monarchy were seen as a sign of divine approval. In 
effect, spiritual and human powers were mutually reinforcing; earthly 
success meant that beings in Kutome had helped Dahomey, and the gods 
and ancestors were treated to sumptuous sacrifices that in twn increased 
their power and ability to assist the monarchy even more. The blessings 
of the gods and ancestors were crucial to legitimize a dynasty that had 
established itself through violence and was expanding through war. 
The monarchy approached the vodun in two ways. Some were em­
braced as allies, pampered and adored, so that their power would develop 
in support of the kingdom. Ancestors and other deities born to the royal 
lineage in particular were empowered. Other vodun were ignored or 
suppresed, in the expectation that their strength would be diminished. 
Choices of which vodun to revere and which to restrain were made con­
sciously as an attempt to alter power relationships among the gods for 
the benefit of the monarchy and the state. But Dahomeans believed that 
the structure of the world of the spirits mirrored the organization of the 
visible world. Changes induced by the monarchy in the religious hierar­
chy thus reflected changing conceptions of the nature of power by the 
kingdom's rulers. In effect, the gods of Dahomey had a history, one that

--- Page 41 ---
24 
Along the Slave Coast 
was "written" by the ruling order to parallel its own conceptions of power 
relations in the visible world. Such a religious history provides insights 
and confirmations of trends but dimly visible in the history of humanity 
in the kingdom. 
Manipulating vodun in the world of Kutome was one strategy to con­
trol and channel spiritual power. The monarchy also recognized that the 
vodun had an organized presence in the visible world. Each congregation 
of a vodun was directed by a pair of priests, male and female, both of 
whom were called vodunon (non = mother, person responsible for a 
child or charge). Networks of vodunon and the vodunsi pledged to their 
god's service were a potential political threat to the monarchy and its 
concern to consolidate power. For this reason, over time the monarchy 
attempted to control appointments to priestly office and to prescribe 
when and if new congregations might be established. The monarchy also 
appears to have forbidden the establishment of religious traditions whose 
public manifestation involved masquerades, for masquerade societies in 
West Africa typically had roles in social control and a degree of political 
power. The Yoruba societies known as Egungun and Oro, both of which 
are associated with control over women, are said to have been brought 
to Dahomey oruy with the establishment of Yoruba-speaking quarters 
at Abomey in the nineteenth century. Participation in them remained 
limited to descendants ofYoruba-speakers into contemporary times. 
Of Cultural Contacts and Power 
Eclecticism and pragmatism were characteristic ofDahomean approaches 
to religion. They also characterized Dahomean attitudes to other cul­
tures. Dahomean leaders eagerly looked to friends as well as enemies for 
innovations that they considered efficacious or simply interesting; not 
only new gods, but technology, dress, art forms, foods, offices, and titles 
were tried, adopted, and sometimes discarded. Signs of foreign material 
culture were frequent. Ali described over the years, the style of court dress 
was drawn literally from the four cardinal directions: the Muslim north, 
the Yoruba-speaking east, the Akan west, and the European-influenced 
south. An 1849 visitor, for example, noted that in comparison with his 
courtiers, "the king was plainly dressed, in a loose robe of yellow silk:

--- Page 42 ---
Along the Slave Coast 
25 
slashed with satin stars and half-moons, Mandingo sandals, and a Span­
ish hat trimmed with gold lace; the only ornament being a small gold 
chain of European manufacture."9 The dress of members of the royal 
line during ceremonies paralleled dress and its usage among the Akan. 
The ritual beaded crown of the Yoruba appears to have been considered 
and rejected, possibly because of its physical inconvenience to its wearer. 
Technicians and craftsmen were relocated to Dahomey to practice 
their skills and teach others. In the late eighteenth century, King Kpengla 
settled a group of Akan-speaking smiths in a village four miles from 
Abomey, where they cast brass into tiny, delicately decorative bells. His 
predecessor, Tegbesu, imported a village that knew pottery making, a 
women's craft, from Aja country to the west. In the nineteenth cen­
tury, smiths from Yoruba-speaking areas were set to work in the Yoruba 
quarter of Abomey to design everything from new weaponry to sacred 
sculptures. 
Firearms were the most visible technological import from Europe, and 
arguably the one with the most impact on the kingdom's history. But 
European visitors carried hundreds of other items as gifts to Dahomey. 
Monopolized by the kings, many were paraded at Customs as part of the 
display of the king's wealth. Sometimes, the presentation of technologies 
by Europeans was pointed. A slave trader presented King Tegbesu with a 
red sedan chair, a gift meant to demonstrate a form of transportation 
potentially more comfortable than the hammocks that carried European 
visitors the sixty miles from coast to court. The king was so charmed by 
the device that he decided to be buried in it, leaving Europeans to swing 
in their hammocks until well after the French conquest one hundred 
years later. The Dahomeans' use of European technology was similarly 
pointed. Toward the end of the nineteenth century, two cuckoo clocks 
hung on the walls of the djononho, the reception room in the outer palace 
court, where impatient Europeans waited interminably long hours to be 
summoned into the royal presence. 10 
Dahomey was a tributary of the Yoruba empire of Oyo for seventy 
years (1748 to c. 1818). During that period, certain court offices derivative 
of Oyo were reported in Dahomey. The legede, for example, were known 
as half-heads, for the characteristic way that, at any given time, one side

--- Page 43 ---
26 
Along the Slave Coast 
of their heads would be shaved; messengers for the kings, their function 
was modeled on the jlan of the court of Oyo. 
It is relatively easy to trace elements of material culture, offices of state, 
and religious institutions brought from abroad. Far more dificult to dis­
cern is the process of adoption of foreign ideas and values. What makes 
one god more attractive than another? What perceived needs are met by 
a given technology? Are some innovations attractive because they fit into 
a Dahomean value system? Or is the value system itself changing as a 
result of foreign influence? Was it in fact a changing value system that led 
to the changes in the political order that will be the focus of this book? 
In the earliest phases of Dahomean history, the monarchy was little 
more than the royal Iineage-a line of strangers to the territory who 
waged war on village-sized principalities. By the second quarter of the 
eighteenth century, as the kingdom struggled to establish control over a 
dramatically expanded territory, women and men of nonroyal lineages 
became active as part of the monarchy. Women within the palace availed 
themselves of opportunities to wield great power. As Dahomey ex­
panded, the balancing of lineage and gender interests that characterized 
the early period gradually changed. The participation of nonroyal men 
and women in the exercise of power at the level of the state became un­
attractive to the monarchy and was no longer solicited. Centralization 
consolidated power in the hands of members of the royal lineage, whose 
male and female members in turn struggled with each other for access 
to wealth and power. 
How and why did these processes take place? Are we in the presence 
of a human universal, a process by which societies as they grow larger 
and more complex inevitably disempower women and certain groups of 
men? Or are we seeing the effects of particular cultural influences that 
prompted the changes? Dahomey had constant and profound interac­
tions over two hundred years with two cultural systems-European and 
Yoruba-both of which are noted for gender and class disparities. Or 
is this a matter of economics? Cultural changes in Dahomey paralleled 
a shrinking of resources and consequent wealth. Was the royal lineage 
simply meeting its own obligations as the total pool of resources con­
tracted? This study cannot fully answer those questions. It will, however,

--- Page 44 ---
Atong the stave Coast 
27 
outline the story of the monarchy, a group of persons at or near the 
centers of power in the kingdom. It will explore the power relationships 
between and among the members of this elite. Who had power, how did 
they gain power, how did they lose it? It will construct an image of the 
offices and institutions that the monarchy built. But even that story, of 
necessity, is speculative. 
Learning about Dahomey --
The central organs of state power in Dahomey were the monarchy and 
the palace. The monarchy is a theoretical construction of my own mak­
ing, a fluid institution made up of those closest to the king whose exer­
cise of power I believe I can demonstrate, though I cannot always name 
precisely who belonged to it. The palace is in a sense more tangible, 
as physical entity and as organization, and it is referred to regularly 
by sources on Dahomey. Nevertheless, it was never described in detail by 
any traveler. Its operation was part of the deliberately constructed mys­
tery that surrounded the monarchy, and its organization as a political 
entity lay beyond the conception of most writers about Dahomey. During 
the lifetime of the kingdom, no one who was a member either of the 
monarchy or of the palace ever recorded her or his memoirs or was inter­
viewed about power and how it was exercised in Dahomey. 
Though twentieth-century writers occasionally mention that a par­
ticular woman once lived in the palace of Abomey. only two interviews 
with former ahosi have ever been published. One had been a soldier 
and the other was a servant to a high-ranking woman} I Until the 1920S, 
the travelers. missionaries, government officials, and scholars who wrote 
about Dahomey were without exception non-Dahomean and male. Ap­
plying European standards of proper female behavior to what they saw, 
they tended to notice women in Dahomey only when women's behavior 
visibly violated European middle-class norms. Women soldiers march in 
great detail across the pages of their accounts, followed at a distance by 
women prostitutes. porters. and traders. Though travelers notice female 
officials at court, particularly by the mid-nineteenth century, they never­
theless tend to see the palace as an enlarged domestic unit rather than 
a political center. As such, they view women's involvement in politics as

--- Page 45 ---
28 
Along the Slave Coast 
a form of meddling. Travelers who have to do business at court frequently 
complain of the power wielded by palace women, hinting that it is both 
inappropriate and illegitimate. 
How can we understand institutions that were central to the state 
but that cast only a faint shadow across Dahomean history? Students of 
sketching are urged to record the shape of an object, not by trying to 
outline it but by observing and drawing the shape of the space that sur· 
rounds it-and Dahomey is richly endowed with evidence about the 
space that surrounds the monarchy and the palace. Because the palace 
was in constant interaction with the kingdom as a whole, by looking at 
the contacts between the more visible outside and the palace inside we 
can tease form out of the accounts of the many persons who visited, 
studied, or lived in what was once Dahomey. But the process is not a 
simple one. 
Historians are sensitive to the reality that the building blocks of their 
trade are both elusive and unreliable. Faulty memory, error·prone eye· 
witness accounts, rumor, self·aggrandizing autobiography, hearsay, and 
competing interpretations of events are the stuff from which history is 
made. The historian in Africa steps even further into a minefield of prob· 
lems with evidence. Outsiders to Dahomey confront a foreign culture 
whose signals and symbols are subject to gross misinterpretation by an 
untutored observer. The information that outsiders learn from Daho· 
means is filtered through the eyes of informants who may or may not be 
knowledgeable about their own culture, and whose interpretations are 
colored by the nature of their relationship to the outsider in question. Al 
the information gathered is in translated form, from Fongbe to a Euro· 
pean tongue, and then it is sometimes translated a second time into an· 
other European language before it becomes available for the historian's 
use. Moreover. outsiders bring with them suppositions about human 
society and about Africa-assumptions that vary with the culture from 
which they spring and with particular moments in history and that calor 
their understanding of what they see. But neither are insiders' accounts 
free of the vicissitudes of time and place. Persons reared in Fon society 
are also strangers in the past. They also visualize and interpret evidence 
on the basis of assumptions about the present and the past that need to 
be examined.

--- Page 46 ---
Along the Slave Coast 
29 
The many voices about Dahomey are in a sense in dialogue with each 
other. Many writers echo observations of predecessors, giving the unwary 
reader a false sense of a preponderance of evidence.12 Some travelers, par­
ticularly in the nineteenth century, are well read in the literature about 
Dahomey and are able to comment on the relative correctness of previ­
ous travelers' work. Twentieth-century scholars are similar. But well-read 
visitors always risk seeing only what their eyes have been prompted to 
see. Others contradict or, without being aware of it, independently cor­
roborate, repeat, or disagree with predecessors. Our guides to this his­
tory will be Dahomeans, travelers, traders, missionaries, officials, and 
scholars-all of them our models for drawing the space that will reveal 
an image of the palace of Dahomey, and I therefore here introduce the 
major players. 
Virtually al accounts of Dahomey written up until the end of the eigh­
teenth century were prOvided by persons associated in some way with the 
overseas slave trade. Prior to the 1720S, Dahomey was an inland kingdom 
cut off from direct contact with European slavers. Accounts up to that 
date provide details of life in neighboring areas, most notably AIIada, 
the kingdom that effectively blocked Dahomey's access to the coast, and 
Whydah, the major slave-trading kingdom and port that Dahomey would 
later control. It was only with Dahomey's conquest of Allada in 1724 that 
Europeans began to come into direct contact with the kingdom. The best 
known and most useful slave-traders' records published in English are by 
Bulfinch Lamb, William Snelgrave, Robert Norris, and Archibald Dalzel. 
All were eyewitnesses to events and observers of the land, people, and 
politics of Dahomey. Al also recorded hearsay evidence, drawing on 
conversations with persons they met in Dahomey, persons who were 
sometimes not closely tied to developments at Dahomey's center. And 
all interpret and judge what they saw and heard, painting a picture of 
eighteenth-century Dahomey that is best described by the late-twentieth­
century idiom bad press. 
Snelgrave, Norris, and Dalzel take pains to defend the slave trade, 
arguing that the savagery of Dahomey, ruled by an arbitrary and abso­
lutist monarch who presided over unparalleled human sacrifice. made 
enslavement and sale in the Western Hemisphere a better alternative for 
Africans than life in Africa. Al assume that Dahomey conquered its way

--- Page 47 ---
30 
Along the Slave Coast 
from the Abomey plateau to the port of Whydah in the 1720S in order to 
be more deeply involved in the slave trade. A lesser-known source from 
this period, John Atkins, who visited the coast in 1721 as a surgeon on 
a slaver, views Dahomey with far more sympathy, arguing instead that 
the kingdom conquered others in order to protect its own people from 
the slave trade. Atkins in the twentieth century became an instrumental 
source for the work of a Nigerian historian, I. A. Akinjogbin, who pro­
motes a controversial thesis that argues that Dahomey conquered the 
coast in order to abolish the slave tradeY 
The French. along with the English and the Portuguese, maintained 
a trading establishment. or fort, at Whydah throughout nearly the entire 
eighteenth century. Two important accounts have come down to us from 
French personnel. Joseph Pruneau de Pommegorge, a factor at Whydah 
as early as the 1750S and director of the French fort in the early 1760s. 
published his Description de la nigritie in 1789. A decade after Pomme­
gorge left Whydah, the fort's chaplain and one of its agents wrote their 
observations in a long document, "Reflexions sur luda par les Sieurs De 
Chenevert et abbe Bulet." that found its way into the French archives.14 
A generation later, in 1797, Vicente Ferreira Pires, a Portuguese priest sent 
to try to convert the king to Roman Catholicism, was in Abomey when 
the king was assassinated. His record provides invaluable though some­
times ambiguous material on court life just before the turn of the nine­
teenth century. 
Ewopean sources are relatively few for the first four decades of the 
nineteenth century. The relative paucity oftravelers' accounts is matched 
by an absence of information from the oral historical memory of the 
court. Adandozan, the king whose rise to power was witnessed by Pires 
in 1797, was removed by a coup d'et:at in about 181S. His successor, Gem, 
eliminated al accounts of Adandozan's reign from the official oral rec­
ords, leaving a twenty-one year gap in Dahomean oral history. In con­
trast, the mid-nineteenth century is rich in travelers' accounts. Between 
1840 and IS65, well over a dozen envoys of various nationalities visited 
Abomey to try to negotiate an end to the trade in slaves, to increase other 
forms of trade, and to gain support for missions and European schools 
at the coast. The two most important among these visitors who published

--- Page 48 ---
Along the Slave Coast 
3 1  
material in English are Frederick E. Forbes and Richard Burton. Forbes 
was a naval commander in the British antislavery squadron who wel­
comed an opportunitr to try to negotiate an end to Dahomey's slave ex­
ports. Burton was a brilliant but erratic intellectual and explorer who in 
midcentury was named British consul in the Bight of Benin. Each in his 
own way contributes to Dahomey's bad press. Now that the slave trade 
had been outlawed by the British, Dahomey was condemned for con­
tinuing it and for continuing its practice of human sacrifice. Burton's 
account is richest in detail and most erudite. Burton was a keen and 
experienced observer of foreign cultures, a gifted linguist who quickly 
learned Fongbe; however, his writings on Dahomey also reflect his arro­
gance and contempt for West Africans, both of which evidently were 
apparent when he visited the kingdom. The Dahomeans developed a 
strong distaste for Burton, ultimately excluding him from ceremonies 
and refusing to negotiate with him. It is Burton more than any other 
visitor of the period who pointed the way toward the pseudoscientific 
racism that characterizes so many accounts of Africa toward the end of 
the century and beyond. 
The depth of the Dahomean dislike for Burton contrasts with the af­
fection Dahomeans expressed for J. A. Skertchly, a British entomologist 
who arrived in the kingdom to gather specimens but who was effectively 
detained in Abomey for eight months in 1871. Made a prince by King 
Glele, Skertchly was entertained and honored at what was probably the 
happiest period of Glele's reign. Using his time to make observations 
about human rather than insect society, Skertchly is able to comment on 
Burton's observations and add new material to the corpus of information 
about the kingdom. By the late nineteenth century, the French were 
becoming increasingly active in the area, making continuous represen­
tations to Glele to try to assert their claims on the coast. A series of 
accounts from persons who participated in official missions to the court 
or who were held hostage by the Dahomeans as negotiations broke 
down paves the way to numerous descriptions of the war waged by the 
French against Dahomey in 1892-93, of which the most lucid are those 
of Alexandre d' Albeca and Edouard Aublet. 
With the colonial period comes an important shift in the stance of

--- Page 49 ---
32 
Along the Slave Coast 
major contributors to Dahomean historiography. Gone is the bad press 
of the precolonial period, replaced by accounts that adopt a Dahomean 
viewpoint or at least show respect for the kingdom: for building and cen­
tralizing a state, for administrative efficiency, for military prowess, for 
artistic creativity. The early colonial period was marked by two major 
works by French officials, Auguste Le Herisse and Bernard Maupoil. As 
representatives of colonial authority who nevertheless displayed great 
sensitivity toward African culture, the two were participant -observers of 
Dahomean life long before the term came into vogue as a method for 
anthropological field research. Le Herisse served two tours as colonial 
administrator (commandant de cercle) of Abomey in the first decade of 
the twentieth century. He carefully recorded oral accounts of prominent 
members of the royal family, drawing most centrally on the knowledge 
of Agbidinukun, a son ofGlele and one of a number of professional court 
historians responsible for learning and conveying the history of the king­
dom. Closely allied to the children of Behanzin through his marriage to 
a daughter of that king, Le Herisse helped to shape the twentieth-century 
history of Dahomey by attempting to integrate an understanding of Afri­
can culture into administrative and judicial processes. Maupoil, who 
served in Dahomey from 1934-36, built a monumental study of divina­
tion and Dahomean religion around the memoirs of one of Behanzin's 
chief diviners, Gedegbe. Maupoil writes with uncritical admiration for 
his subject, even though Gedegbe's memories are as often as not self-
• 
servmg. 
Most prominent among the colonial-era anglophone researchers was 
the American anthropologist Melville J. Herskovits. Despite remaining 
only a few months in the field in 1931, Herskovits and his spouse, Frances, 
contribute valuable anthropological material, though with occasional 
lapses in understanding that have been noted by subsequent scholars. 
Herskovits's vision of Dahomey was fonned by his major informant, 
Rene Aho, a grandson of King GJe1e who later produced several articles 
on Fon social structure and who continued to work as guide and infor­
mant for scholars and filmmakers until his death in May 1977.1³ 
The colonial period also saw the first written contributions from Da-

--- Page 50 ---
Along the Slave Coast 
33 
homeans. Two of the earliest authors to deal with the history and culture 
of the kingdom, Maximilien Qu61Um and Paul Hawume, represented 
communities that were distant from Dahomey's center. Quenum was 
born of one of several prominent trading families licensed by the kings 
of Dahomey who lived and worked in the port ofWhydah. His first book, 
Au pays des Fons, a compilation of information about Fon culture, lan­
guage, and religion, with a brief note on the kingdom's history, appeared 
in 1936. Quenum's Les ancbtres de la famille Quenum (1981) includes an 
invaluable record of one lineage's changing relations with the kingdom 
of Dahomey. Paul Hazoume was born of a father who was a court official 
in Porto Novo, a rival kingdom to Dahomey. He was a teacher, novelist, 
journalist, ethnographer, and political activist whose two major works 
dealing with Dahomean history are the novel Doguicimi, first published 
in 1938, and the ethnographic study of oath taking, Le pacte de sang au 
Dahomey, first published in 1937. Like some of the works of Hazoun£s 
contemporary negritude writers, Doguidmi glories in the virtues of Afri­
can womanhood. It is a tale of a prince's wife who, in contrast to the 
king's wives, is absolutely obedient, faithful, and loyal to her husband, 
even unto death. Rich in ethnographic detail, Doguicimi is regularly cited 
as a historical source, even though some of its assertions are not corrobo­
rated by other sources; 
French research facilities in West Africa, which after independence in 
1960 became African-controlled, were an important support and outlet 
for research by French and African scholars, particularly after World 
War 11. During its heyday in the 1950S and 1960s, the journal Etudes 
Dahomeennes and IFAN (the Institut FranÙis-Iater Fondamental­
d'Afrique Noire) published work by Edouard Dunglas, Anatole Coissi, 
Paul Falcon, Alexandre Adande, Serpos Tidjani, and others. Dahomean 
history was also published by the professional sociologists and ethnog­
raphers associated with the historical museum situated in the remains 
of the palace of Abomey: Paul Mercier, Jacques Lombard, and Ernest 
d'Oliveira, among others. Mention needs also to be made of Pierre 
Verger, a Frenchman beloved by West Africans whose own triangular re­
search career-incorporating Europe, West Africa, and Brazil-allowed

--- Page 51 ---
34 
Along the Slave Coast 
him to publish important, cross-cultural field studies of religion and to 
make major portions of Brazilian archival records accessible to others 
through translation and publication. 
The explosion of interest in African history coupled with the coming 
of independence in 1960 opened the way for dozens of African and non­
African scholars to write about Dahomey in the remainder of the twen­
tieth century. Usually drawing on oral traditions that they collected in 
their home areas, numerous Africans from the area that had been pre­
colonial Dahomey have written accounts of the kingdom as part of de­
gree programs at the University of Benin and at universities in France. 
European and American students have drawn more heavily on archival 
and published sources. Because such a wealth of published information 
exists on Dahomey, many Americans have used the kingdom as a para­
digm for theoretical analyses, usually drawing heavily from the most 
accessible of the sources in English: Herskovits, Burton, and Forbes.16 
Preeminent among recent scholars has been Robin Law. who in the past 
two decades has published prolifically on nearly all aspects of Dahomean 
history and has done valuable historiographical work correlating unpub­
lished correspondence with the evidence provided by published sources. 
Though nearly all scholars try to use evidence from both archival! 
published accounts and from oral narratives collected in the field (by 
themselves or others), the work of most can be distinguished by a heavy 
reliance on one or the other major areas of evidence, either oral accounts 
or archival and travelers' records. What is striking about the work of 
those who concentrate on the archival record, for example, is the degree 
to which the concerns of the Europeans who provide their fundamental 
evidence are reflected in the kinds of questions that the historians ask. 
Travelers assumed that their central concerns in visiting the kingdom 
were equally the central concerns of the monarchy. Over the course of 
the history of Dahomey, those concerns included the regulation of com­
merce, debates in Europe over the slave trade and its abolition, the need 
to develop "legitimate" trade, the negotiation of treaties, and the rec­
ognition of European territorial claims. The contemporary historians 
follow their lead. However, were those preoccupations shared by the 
monarchy of Dahomey?

--- Page 52 ---
Along the Slave Coast 
35 
The oral records suggest something rather different, a kingdom ab­
sorbed by concerns for expansion, for consolidation of control over new 
territory, for celebrating military and cultural prowess, and for maximiz­
ing the support of the gods. The twentieth-century collection and inte­
gration of oral memory into the Western-style construction of Daho­
mean history has been a major accomplishment. Principal in importance 
among those who have collected oral narratives and integrated them with 
archival documents is Maurice Ahanhanzo GleIe, a direct descendant of 
Ahanhanzo, the prince chosen as heir by Glele but who died prematurely 
in the mid-1S70S. Glele unabashedly presents his family's perspective on 
history, noting correctly the advantages enjoyed by scholars born of the 
royal family, who can build on cultural and linguistic understandings 
learned from a very young age to coUect oral memoirs. 
The oral documentation that GleJe collected is illustrative of the major 
characteristics of twentieth-century oral history. First, the oral history of 
Dahomey reflects the perspective of the ruling class, and specifically the 
ruling dynasty. But the ruling dynasty was itself divided into ten sub­
lineages that included respectively the descendants of the ten kings ac­
knowledged in tradition. Each sublineage preserved its own history, so 
there are multiple sources; yet all present the dynasty's point of view. 
Though there are occasional oral records of individuals or villages con­
quered by Dahomey, those narratives tend to stress positive aspects of 
their relations with Dahomey; for example. their integration into the 
kingdom. and the opportunities that conquered peoples were offered to 
become successful Dahomeans. Rarely do we hear with any clarity the 
responses of areas and individuals who were victims of Dahomey. No­
where do we learn details of life in the slave villages that were created in 
nineteenth-century Dahomey. of the slave revolts mentioned in passing 
by travelers, or even of the perspectives of Dahomean peasants. In short, 
Dahomean oral history is essentially the self-serving story of those who 
held power. Though some of those narratives are based on testimony 
from villages that were subject to Dahomean exploitation. the historical 
memory as it is retained is far from critical. Indeed, Dahomean historical 
memory puts everyone on the "right" side: the narrators of oral history 
regularly claim that their ancestors were al either directly or by extension

--- Page 53 ---
36 
Along the Slave Coast 
a part of the ruling body, an dose and favored associates of one king or 
another. 
Secondly, twentieth-century oral narratives describe the kingdom as 
it existed toward the end of the nineteenth century, essentially during 
the reign of King Glele. Many characteristics of the kingdom based on 
the period of Glele are projected backwards over the entire history of the 
kingdom. The structures of the Dahomean state thus appear to have 
sprung fully developed from the time of the first king, and to have re­
mained unchanged for more than two hundred years. Even though it is 
based on the state at the time of Glele, Dahomey's oral history is filtered 
through the experience of the French conquest and of colonialism. 
France destroyed Dahomey, incorporated her land into a colony and 
sent her monarch into exile, making Dahomey both a victim of injustice 
and a symbol oflost independence, a nation whose glories would be sub­
ject to magnification and weaknesses subject to forgetfulness. In 1894, 
Behanzin. the king who was defeated and deposed by the French, was 
denounced by the royal family for his disgrace; a century later, he was 
remembered as a heroic resister of French colonialism. Moreover, by 
deposing one king and setting up his brother as their puppet, the French 
precipitated a rift within the ruling family that has yet to be healed. As 
the twentieth century wore on, the memories of the precolonial era began 
to be articulated more and more in the idiom of the French administra­
tion and the evolving modern institutional state structures. Is the cen­
tralization that historians now find to have been characteristic of the 
Dahomean administration in fact Abomean or Parisian? 
As we move farther from the nineteenth century, the accuracy of ac­
counts is increasingly in question. Each generation of scholars collecting 
traditions has met fewer persons who could personally remember the 
precolonial era. At the period of my initial field research in 1972-73, 
for example. more than a dozen sons and daughters of Kings Glele and 
Behanzin were still living, but they were only a tiny fraction of the per­
sons who had been available to Mercier in the 1950S, to Hazoume in the 
1920S, or to Le Herise in the 1900S. None of those still-living princes 
or princesses had witnessed as adults the last years of the kingdom, By 
my second research trip in 1984, all of them had gone to Kutome. Heads

--- Page 54 ---
Along the Slave COQst 
37 
of lineages and households. the usual repositories of oral history, are in­
creasingly individuals who are Western-educated. including persons who 
have researched and written Dahomean history. Sophisticated in their 
understanding of issues of Dahomean history and historic methodology, 
they can hardly be considered to be repositories of a relatively untouched 
oral tradition. Yet oral accounts about precolonial Dahomey continue to 
be collected and are often used uncritically. Recently. researchers have 
tried to understand how Dahomey was viewed by her neighbors by 
collecting materials in areas peripheral to the center of the kingdom. 
Though laudable as an effort. is it reasonable to assume that peasants 
living in the Weme River valley in the 1980s have retained enough details 
of eighteenth-century history, for example. to describe accurately the 
dress of Dahomean women soldiers who purportedly fought against their 
ancestors some 250 years before? 17 
The widespread and uncritical collection and use of oral narratives is 
related to another phenomenon of twentieth-century Abomean experi­
ence: the commoditization of history. Concerned to minimize the influ­
ence of the former kingdom in colonial Dahomean affairs, the French 
isolated Abomey politically and commercially. The monarchy was abol­
ished in 1900 and the environs of the city were divided into eight cantons 
to discourage the amassing of political influence by any single chief. The 
north-south rail line and road were run six miles to the east through 
Bohicon, a town that also became the site of commercial palm-oil pro­
cessing. Meanwhile, the French encouraged artisanal activity and the cre­
ation of a museum in the remains of the palace and the preservation and 
promotion of the past became one of the few viable economic activities 
in the region. apart from farming. Knowledgable Abomeans-guides to 
the museum, elderly members of the royal family, and others-became 
middlemen purveying history and culture. How does the commoditiza­
tion of historical information alter its content and interpretation as it is 
effectively sold to the succession of scholars, filmmakers. journalists, and 
tourists who have visited the area throughout the twentieth century? 
Finally, too few historians have taken into account the reruity that oral 
history over time works very much like written history. That is. succeed­
ing generations rethink and rework oral history to reflect contemporary

--- Page 55 ---
JB 
Along the Slave Coast 
concerns, just as literate societies and their historians regularly rewrite 
the past to fit the present. The history of the kingdom of Dahomey ap· 
pears always to have been organized and retold through the chronology 
of the kings and the principal events of their reigns. This seeming preci· 
sion masks a central concern for legitimacy on the part of the Dahomean 
monarchy-first, the legitimacy of the dynasty to rule, and then the le· 
gitimacy of any individual king to rule vis·a·vis other kingly candidates. 
With each new king, history of necessity had to be recreated to justify 
and legitimize the present. Dahomean history claims perhaps the most 
blatant manipulation of oral memory ever documented-the elimina· 
tion of the twenty·one·year reign of Adandozan, from 1797 to 1818. But 
Dahomean oral memory is replete with far more subtle and complex 
examples of historical manipulation, some of which are corroborated in 
the written records of the past. The true history of the royal family is said 
to have been esoteric knowledge, with elements carefully hidden from 
outsiders to the royal line. The myths of the origin of the royal lineage, 
for example, were revealed only after the fall of the kingdom and were 
first published in Le Herisse's 1911 account Nevertheless, aspects of the 
kingdom's known history make clear why suppression of knowledge of 
the royal lineage's origins would have had instrumental value in pre· 
colonial Dahomey. Part of the history of Dahomey thus is the history of 
the invention of history, and the motives of those who changed it.18 
Historical evidence for Dahomey includes more than oral narratives 
about history and written documents by traveJers and scholaIS. Historic 
realities are embedded in certain social and religious institutions that 
provide corroboration and clarification of oral narratives and written 
texts. A practice that anthropologists caU positional succession keeps 
the lines of descent from influential historical figures sharply drawn. 
Through positional succession, titled and wealthy Dahomeans at their 
deaths passed their names and estates to direct descendants in their patri· 
lineages. All members of the line then had the same kin relationship to 
the replacement that they had to the original individual. In effect, the 
heir became his or her predecessor. Positional succession and a related 
institution, perpetual kinship, insured that major estate holders would 
survive, literally, into the present, and that branches of the various fam-

--- Page 56 ---
Along the Slave Coast 
39 
ily lines emanating from Abomey would remain closely linked to their 
founders. A cult dedicated to the deified dead of the royal family, 
Nesuhwe, similarly ensures the perpetual remembrance of the promi­
nent children of each king, whose spirits possess trained vodunsi (adepts) 
during annual rituals. Neither positional succession nor the existence 
of Nesuhwe ensures that the persons who embody historic figures are 
deeply knowledgable about their predecessors; it does, however, provide 
a framework of names and relationships of influential Abomeans during 
any given king's reign.19 
Obviously, all historical material, whether written or oral in origin, 
needs to be treated with skepticism. And al historians similarly must be 
confronted for their manner and motives in piecing together the past. 
My particular historical perspective grows out of the selections I have 
made of written sources, out of my understanding of the accounts of 
people in Abomey that I as often as not met by chance, out of the vagaries 
of my memory, and out of a sense of what fits with my own vision of 
Dahomean culture as I experienced it. My work draws more heavily on 
published as opposed to archival sources, in large part because the pub­
lished materials are particularly rich with cultural material. Archival rec­
ords, in contrast, tend to offer a great deal of detail about commercial 
and political relations between Europeans and Dahomey. My interpreta­
tion of the Dahomean past also relies on ora1 records collected by me and 
by others. It particularly privileges points in Dahomean history where 
outsiders and insiders agree, places where the oral record corroborates or 
clarifies the written accounts of contemporary outsiders. The history of 
Dahomey that I write today differs from what I believed about the king­
dom twenty years ago, and differs from the way I shall see it two decades 
hence. Like all history, mine is in a sense fiction, yet it is a fiction in­
formed by records of human experience and perception-fiction that is 
intended to convey something of what happened and was experienced by 
people Jiving in a small part of West Africa some time ago . ...".

--- Page 57 ---
2 
From Dahomey's Origins 
to 1 740 
They generally say that it was Dako who led us to Abomey following a 
quarrel between him and his brothers at the death of their father . . . .  
That ;s not completely true. 
Agbidinukun, brother of King Behanzin, as told 10 U HÛrissÛ 
The Slave Trade and the Founding of the Kingdom  
The period up to the 17205 is the most difficult to construct in the history 
of Dahomey. It is there that oral narratives and travelers' accounts diverge 
most widely-that the accounts of insiders differ most from the written 
observations of contemporary outsiders. Indeed. there is virtually no cor­
respondence between oral traditions and contemporary written records 
prior to the 17105, even though oral narratives and some scholars agree 
that by that period the kingdom may have been in existence for as many 
as one hundred years. 
Part of the reason for the lack of accord between Dahomean oral rec­
ord and outside observation is the fact that travelers prior to the 1720S 
had no direct contact with Dahomey as a state. Concentrated near the 
coast, traveJers knew the name Fan or Fain only as one of the several 
interior nations from which slaves were brought for the Atlantic trade. In 
the interior, however, that same Fon nation was establishing itself as a 
political entity named Dahomey and was beginning the expansion that 
oral memory would recall as a sacred duty, that each king "make Daho­
mey always larger." I 
Dahomey arose some sixty miles from the West African coast on a 
plateau centered in what geographers cal the Dahomey gap, a break in 
40

--- Page 58 ---
From Dahomey's Origins to 1 740 
41 
the coastal rain forest where savannah climate, mixed with some vestiges 
of forest, continues down to the sea. The relatively open and well-watered 
land (more than forty-three inches of rain annually) made viable the cul­
tivation of a wide variety of crops: millet, maize, cassava. beans. cotton, 
and oil palms. among others. The lack of thick forest also left Dahomey 
vulnerable to attack. as the Dahomeans discovered when they fell subject 
to cavalry raids from the Yoruba-speaking kingdom of Oyo. to the east, 
beginning in the second quarter of the eighteenth century. Neverthe­
less, Dahomey's plateau heartland was somewhat sheltered by natural 
barriers, toward which the kingdom expanded. The river Coufo formed 
a boundary to the west and the Zou to the east and northeast. To the 
north lay a series of steep hills and to the south was a swamp. the ko, 
which would later become known as Lama, from the Portuguese word for 
mud. Dahomey over time grew to incorporate territory beyond her natu­
ral boundaries, most notably the older kingdoms of Allada and Whydah 
to the south. But despite the incorporation of those relatively large areas, 
the capital city of Abomey and the lands that surrounded it remained the 
core of a kingdom that was effectively centralized only within the roughly 
one thousand square miles of the Abomey plateau. Other areas, including 
Allada and Whydah, were in effect tributary states administered by gov­
ernors appointed in Abomey. As late as the 1870S, a visitor would remark 
that "the King is but nominal anywhere except in the district immediately 
surrounding the capital."2 
No one knows how or why the people of the Abomey plateau came to 
be called the Fon. The name was recorded in the seventeenth century, 
though a false etymology dates the term to a much later period. the reign 
of Tegbesu (1740-74), who is said to have compared the people to the 
fontin tree, before which all the other trees bow down.) Linguistically and 
culturally, the Fon were part of a cluster of peoples speaking dialects of 
the same language. Different groupings of these peoples are sometimes 
called the Aja, or Ewe. Recently the term Gbe, drawn from their common 
word for language, has been utilized to describe the various peoples as a 
whole. The collective body of the Gbe filed much of the land area of the 
Dahomey gap between the sea and eighty miles in1and. They lived mid­
way betw"een two other major linguistic and culture areas of West Africa,

--- Page 59 ---
42 
From Dahomey's Origins lo 1 740 
Thd • 
• 
A
bo
me
y
 
• 
MAH! 
Totro 
Ii' Alada 
ALLADA 
® Tori 
Savi 
• 
WHYDAH Jaki: 
3. Dahomey in the early eighteenth century 
the matrilineal Akan to the west and patrilineal Yoruba-speaking peoples 
to the east, both of whom had major impacts on their culture. 
In the period before the 1710S, however> only the odd rumor of the 
kingdom of the Fon reached European ears, and only as individuals did 
Dahomeans enter directly into contact with Europeans. Some of those 
individuals were middlemen traders who accompanied slaves to the 
coast. A far greater proportion arrived on the coast as commodities des­
tined for the overseas slave trade. Reputed to have been bad slaves-they

--- Page 60 ---
From Dahomey's Origins fo 1 740 
43 
tended to commit suicide-Dahomeans would have been enslaved as a 
result of wars, raids into their territory, criminal condemnation, or pos­
sibly sale in times of natural crisis. Later in the eighteenth century, 
Dahomey would become well-known as a slave-trading state, and though 
scholars disagree about the process by which that occurred, income from 
the trade was undisputably a central source of state revenue for at least 
half the life of the kingdom. Given the importance of the export of slaves 
for Dahomey, it is useful to look for a moment at the experience of the 
trade of Dahomean individuals. Oral traditions tell us nothing in this 
area, but the European slave traders, who created virtually all contem­
porary written records of the time, provide details of what happened to 
Dahomeans who journeyed to the coast and into the infamous middle 
passage at the turn of the eighteenth century. 
Fan slaves likely traveled to the coast as part of a slave caravan, possibly 
joining individuals from other areas, a few of whom could have come 
from as far as a three months' walk inland.4 They would have walked 
single file, though travelers in later times would describe wide roads in 
the area, and they would likely have taken four to five days to reach the 
coast, as did travelers in later times. If they left Abomey itself, at slightly 
more than one thousand feet in altitude, and followed one of the two 
main routes to the south, they would have begun an immediate though 
imperceptible descent to Cana, passing by intercropped fields and occa­
sional vilages of mud houses with thatch roofs. After descending more 
than eight hundred feet, they would have reached the edges of the Ko 
swamp, which was roughly six to seven miles wide. The Ko was crossed 
most easily from December to June; the rains made passage difficult and 
sometimes impossible in July to November. Once across the Ko, the Fon 
slaves would have climbed to heights some four hundred feet above sea 
level. where they entered the partially forested territory controlled by the 
kingdom of Allada. Slave caravans may have been halted to pay tolls at 
various towns along the route, and they were most certainly stopped be­
fore Allada's capital. Allada was able through much of the seventeenth 
century to control the roads both north and south, serving as a kind of 
funnel through which slaves from a relatively wide area ofGbe¬, Yoruba-, 
and Hausa-speaking populations could be channeled to the coast and to

--- Page 61 ---
44 
From Dahomey's Origins to 1 740 
any one of a series of coastal settlements from which traders of various 
European nationalities-French, Dutch, English, and Portuguese-op­
erated trading factories. 
At the beginning of the eighteenth century, the coastal area between 
what is now eastern Ghana and western Nigeria was made up of tiny 
independent kingdoms, whose heads are descriptively and derisively 
called roitelets (kinglets) in the French sources. These kings rose and fell 
depending upon their warring skills in face of competing states and upon 
their ability to maintain comfortable working relationships with Euro­
pean factors, on the one hand, and with more powerful polities in the 
interior, most often AUada and Oyo, on the other. Their fates were de­
pendent, too, on the demand for slaves, which fluctuated according to 
economic and political factors in Europe and in the slave-using territories 
controlled by European states. Even though Whydah was in theory a 
tributary state, AlIada in the late seventeenth century preferred to send 
slaves southeast to its subordinate states on the coast, initially to Offra 
and later to Jakin, in the area of contemporary Godomey. Nevertheless, 
Whydah managed to attract a good portion of the total trade, despite 
intermittent hostilities with Allada, particularly as the volume of trade 
dramatically increased near the end of the seventeenth century. Daho­
mean slaves thus might well have passed from Allada to follow the road 
that ran slightly to the southwest and through the kingdom ofTori. Along 
this route they would have passed an occasional European trader travel­
ing up to Allada in a hamock. Hamocks were large; one traveler 
noted that they were made from cloths nine feet long and seven wide. 
The hammock was tied to a long. stout pole and balanced on the heads 
of two male carriers who moved at a near run, switching off from time 
to time with other pairs of carriers.5 The traveler was shaded by an awn­
ing that projected eighteen inches or so to either side of the pole. Unable 
to see out and constantly jostled by the rapid motion, travelers grumbled 
at what must have been one of the least comfortable forms of luxury 
conveyance ever devised. 
A half-mile south of the river that marked the boundary between Tori 
and Whydah lay Savi, capital ofWhydah and a town that might well have 
impressed Fon slaves at the time. Savi lay seven miles inland from the

--- Page 62 ---
From Dahomey's Origins to 1 740 
45 
sea and boasted the trading establishments of the four major European 
nations. William Smith, who arrived in the town shortly after it had been 
burned by the Dahomeans in 1727, gleaned this description of its previous 
prosperity from fellow Europeans: 
Al the Factory-houses were built after the European Fashion, being 
lofty, spacious and very airy; containing many neat commodious 
Apartments; also to each a fine large open Hall with cool Balconies, 
etc. all these upon the First Floor. Underneath upon the Ground 
Floor were their Warehouses. These delightful DweUings contrib­
uted very much, not only to the Comfort and Satisfaction, but also 
to the Health of the Europeans. The Town was so exceeding popu­
lous that it was with Difficulty one pass'd along the Streets, tho' they 
were very broad. Here were daily Markets wherein many Sorts of 
European, as well as African Commodities, were exhibited to pub­
lick Sale, also great Variety of Provisions. 6 
Travelers as a rule remarked the apparent fertility and prosperity of the 
kingdom of Whydah prior to the Dahomean conquest. It was densely 
populated and intensively farmed, and Europeans marveled at the indus­
try of the Hweda (people of Whydah) in producing two harvests each 
year and husbanding abundant livestock. Provisions at Whydah were said 
to be the best and the least expensive along the African coast. By the end 
of the seventeenth century, the French and English had also built mud­
walled fortified establishments at Glehwe, three miles from the sea and 
the site of the modern city of Whydah. Fon slaves would have passed 
through Glehwe, and possibly remained there in stockades as their sale 
was negotiated and enough slaves for a full cargo were assembled, a pro­
cess that could take several months. 
The degradation and terror that slaves must have felt as they reached 
the sea are easily imagined from the traders' accounts. Stripped of all 
clothing by their sellers, men and women alike squatted to preserve some 
semblance of modesty. They typically received cloth again only when they 
had boarded a ship. Slaves were examined by ships' doctors, who checked 
teeth, eyes, genitals, and general physical appearance, rejecting people 
estimated to be more than thirty-five years old, along with those who

--- Page 63 ---
46 
From Dahomey's Origins to J 740 
were lame or diseased, smallpox in particular being endemic. Once se­
lected, slaves were branded on the chest or shoulder with a mark indicat­
ing the trading company or ship, "the place being anointed with a little 
palm oil, which caus'd but little pain, the mark being usually well in four 
or five days, appearing very plain and white after," according to one 
slaver's claim.7 
Men fetched a higher price than women. lust after the turn of the 
eighteenth century. products that had been produced by slave labor in 
Brazil-tobacco and gold-were beginning to he introduced as trade 
items. in addition to the cowry shells. metals. cloth, and firearms regu­
larly traded in the seventeenth century. Tobacco would become a staple 
of the trade for more than a century. Treated with molasses to keep it 
from drying out and rotting. the tobacco shipped to the West African 
coast was of the lowest quality-so poor that it was not permitted to be 
imported into Portugal. 
Scholarly statistics describe gender differences in the Atlantic trade, 
with men bought in significantly higher numbers than women. The 
male-ta-female proportion shipped out ofWhydah by French traders in 
the second decade of the eighteenth century. for example, has been esti­
mated at 1.8 to 1.0.8 But the neat averages disappear at the level of indi­
vidual slave captains. who felt pressure to load cargoes regardless of gen­
der. Once slaves were purchased, traders incurred costs by having to 
maintain them, albeit meanly. Life along the coast was known to be dan­
gerous to the health of Europeans. and delays could reduce a ship's crew 
to dangerously low numbers. Malaria, not yet identified. was only one 
of a number of deadly fevers, and mosquitoes were so persistent that 
Englishmen in the Glehwe factory took opium or laudanum to sleep 
through incessant nightly bombardments. Holding slaves on board, the 
alternative to suffering ashore, was also a problem: again and again, slav­
ers talk of rebellion and suicide by drowning on the part of slaves who 
expected to be eaten by the whites. In short, traders filed their ships as 
quickly as possible with whatever healthy humans were available-men. 
women, and children. 
The final march for departing Fan slaves was the three-mile road from 
Glehwe to the sea. Passing over sand ridges, it dipped three times into

--- Page 64 ---
From Dahomey's Origins to 1 740 
47 
streams that were muddy depressions in January to March but that could 
be neck-deep in water in May through July. Dahomean slaves arriving 
at the beach would have been hard-pressed even to see the European 
ships, which moored as far as two miles offshore. The surf between the 
ships and Whydah beach was legendary; it broke three times, over two 
sandbars and then the shore itself. So treacherous were the waves that 
Whydah fishermen never went to sea and fished only in the lagoons. 
CanoemeD had to be imported from the Gold Coast, some one hundred 
miles to the west, to ferry goods to shore and human cargoes to the ships. 
William Bosman wrote after visits in 1697 and 1699 that "this Port is so 
incomodious and dangerous; by reason of the horrible Burnings in the 
Sea, that we cannot land here without running a great Risque; but in 
April, May, June and July, the Sea burns so violently, that according to 
the Proverb, he ought to have two Lives who ventures,"9 Canoes capsized 
nearly daily except in the relatively calm period at the end of the dry 
season. The hapless victims of upset boats were often torn apart by the 
sharks that literally patrolled the area and that were said by some to fol­
low ships all the way to Barbados. 
Notwithstanding the dangers, Whydah was a central slaving port, a site 
of the forced emigration at its height of as many as 15,000 persons an­
nually. In all, the two-hundred-mile-long strip of West African beach that 
included Whydah and became known as the Slave Coast saw the export 
of Africans grow from a little more than 10,000 in the decade of the 1640S 
to peaks of more than 150,000 in each of the first two decades of the 
eighteenth century. The total number of persons who left the Slave Coast 
up to 1850 was estimated by Patrick Manning at nearly two million per­
sons, nearly one-fifth of the entire volume of the Atlantic trade. Slave­
trade statistics do not tell us how many Fon were among these numbers. 
However, Gbe-speaking peoples constituted the vast majority up to the 
turn of the nineteenth century.1O 
We have little information about what early Dahomeans knew of the 
conditions of the overseas slave trade, or of their atitudes toward it. 
There is no way to know, either, jf al the Fon slaves at the turn of the 
eighteenth century were captives of war or if some were being sold into 
the trade by other Dahomeans, perhaps even by the monarchy itself. We

--- Page 65 ---
48 
From Dahomey's Origins to 1 740 
know that Fon persons were trading slaves through several coastal ports 
by the 171os. Europeans claimed that in Whydah, the king, who received 
women as wives from families within the kingdom. sometimes sold 
women of his own household to make up cargoes-something that was 
done by the king of Dahomey later in the eighteenth century. As early as 
1727, sale into the overseas trade was used by the Dahomean monarchy 
to dispose of politically troublesome persons, including women of the 
palace organization. We also know with certainty that at least some of the 
original inhabitants ofWawe, the area from which Dahomey grew, were 
sold into the trade. Known as Gedevi (children of Gede), they left their 
traces in the Western Hemisphere: they established their vodun, Gede 
(Ghede), in Haiti, to guard the territory between the worlds of the living 
and the dead.11 
Contemporary written accounts before the 1720S are preoccupied with 
the mechanics of the slave trade. Oral traditions that describe the same 
period in contrast speak only of the founding of Dahomey and its early 
wars. All agree that the kingdom began in Wawe, now a village approxið 
mately midway between Abomey and Cana. Details of the myth that deñ 
scribes the origins of the royal family were apparently guarded until the 
twentieth century by the royal lineage as part of the secret history of 
Dahomey. The myth tells the story of a line descended from the mating 
of a princess of the royal family of Tado, in what is now Togo, with 
a leopard. The princess's leopardlike son, Agasu, became the tohwiyo 
(mythical founder) of the clan of the Agasuvi (children of Agasu). Mi­
grating from Tado, the Agasuvi settled in Allada, where they became 
the ruling lineage and hence took the name Alladahonu (people from 
Allada). After a succession dispute, three Agasuvi brothers separated. 
One remained to rule in Allada, a second went southeast to found the 
kingdom of Porta Novo, and the third traveled north to found Dahomey. 
Scholars have pointed out a number of problems w ith this myth as his­
tory: that a kinship link between the dynasties of Dahomey and Allada is 
unlikely, since the founding of Porta Novo and Dahomey were separated 
by some one hundred years, and neither the ruling line of Allada nor that 
of Porta Novo looked to Agasu as a tohwiyo. On the other hand, some

--- Page 66 ---
From Dahomey's Origins to J 740 
49 
scholars have taken the myth literally, using it to argue that the rulers of 
Dahomey were part of a diaspora of Yoruba-speaking peoples that began 
in Ife, Nigeria. and moved successively to Ketu and Tado. What is never 
in dispute. however. is the belief that the ruling dynasty came from some­
where outside the founding center of Wawe. The myth and its meaning 
will become important to our story during the reign of Agaja. Mean­
while, the likely scenario for the founding of Dahomey, which in fact does 
not contradict the oral traditions. is that a relatively small band of 
strangers setded in Wawe and came to control it. Given the banditry and 
fluctuating warfare among tiny polities in the region. Le Herisse's de­
scription. which parallels other sources, seems apt: "One sees them first 
as an outlaw horde that settles among foreign tribes, forming alliances 
and then. under cover of these and using both force and trickery, spread­
ing out like a stain of oil from the spot where they had landed." 12 
Table I. KIngs and Kpojito (reign-males) of Dahomey 
Dates 
King 
KpoJito 
Wegbaja 
Akaba 
C. 1716-174O 
Agaja 
Adonon 
1740-1774 
Tegbesu 
Hwanjile 
1774-1789 
Kpengla 
Chai 
1789-1797 
Agonglo 
Senume 
1797-1818 
Adandozan 
Kentobasin 
1818-1858 
Gezo 
Agontime 
1858-1889 
Glele 
Zoyindi 
1889-1894 
Behanzin 
Kamlin 
1894-1900 
Agoliagbo 
Kanai 
Dates in this table are the traditional order. See note 3 for a different view.

--- Page 67 ---
50 
From Dahomey's Origins to 1 740 
An etymology for the name Dahomey was published as early as 1789 
by Robert Norm. Dan (Da, in Norris) was a king of Abomey defeated by 
Dakodonu (Tacoodonou), who then made good a threat by cutting open 
Dan's stomach and building his palace on the dead king's belly (ha = 
stomach; me = in; i.e., in the stomach of Dan). The story was repeated 
regularly during the next two hundred years, though the conquering king 
was sometimes said to have been Wegbaja or Akaba instead of 
Dakodonu, and Dan was occasionally called Agrim. False etymologies are 
common in Dahomean history, and the closely related term honme (ho, 
han = portal or entrance, particularly to a palace; me = in), meaning 
royal palace, appears in other place-names. for example. at Ajahome (Aja 
royal palace), the site of a royal residence set up west of the Coufo River 
during the time of Tegbesu. Honme is even used to refer to the central 
palace in Abomey. Danhome, in the stomach of Dan, could well have 
originated as a pun on Danhonme. the royal palace of Dan. Even if the 
etymology is false, the story is important, because it conveys the bellicose 
spirit that typified Dahomey from its earliest days and that was deliber­
ately directed toward potential enemies. In similar fashion, Agaja bragged 
to a European visitor in 1728 that his grandfather (Dakodonu) conquered 
2 countries, his father (Wegbaja) 18, and his brother (Akaba) 42, while he 
himself had conquered 209, a comment that simultaneously underlines 
Dahomean militarism and emphasizes the small scale of political entities 
in the area.13 
Interlopers from elsewhere, and people who had gained control by 
force, the founders of Dahomey would have needed to establish their au­
thority and legitimacy. In a world where wealth and prestige were linked 
to the numbers of individuals under a person's control, the royal clan 
would have tried to increase its dependents as rapidly as possible. Slaves 
and wives, both of which were costly to acquire, were an obvious means 
to building larger numbers quickly. Raids would have yielded both, along 
with the hostility of peoples in the path of the Dahomeans. Evidence from 
the coast suggests that kings sometimes commandeered women from their 
subjects without compensating them with bridewealth. as patrilineal cus­
tom demanded, a practice that probably was the same in Dahomey, where 
in fact it occurred in later periods. The king's household would have grown

--- Page 68 ---
From Dahomey's Origins to 1 740 
51 
to outnumber those of other prominent persons in the area. By 1724, 
Bulfinch Lamb would estimate the number of king's wives at more than 
two thousand.14 The organization of the king's household during this pe­
riod probably began to take on the forms that would be noted by later 
travelers. Descriptions of the palace of the kings ofWhydah, for example, 
correspond to later evidence from Abomey: that the wives of the king 
cultivated fields and had the right to make and sell goods on their own 
accounts, that entry into the palace was strictly controlled, that people 
were forced to get out of the wives' paths when the women left the palace, 
and that new kings inherited the wives of their father. There is even evi­
dence from Wbydah that wives of the king were involved in administra­
tive matters. Bosman reported at the end of the seventeenth century that 
the king's wives carried out the destruction of property of important per­
sons who had been found guilty of offenses against the state. Nearly thirty 
years later, the Chevalier des Marchais similarly reported about Whydah 
that "when they [the king's wives J arrive at the house of the person that 
they are to chastise, they announce the will of the King to him and then 
immediately begin to strip, break or burn everything that they find. One 
cannot oppose them: apart from it being a state crime to obstruct the 
execution of the orders of the King, it is an unpardonable offense to 
touch a wife of the Prince." lĽ 
The Authority of Princesses: The Succession Struggle 
between Hangbe and Agaja  
While the organization of the ahosi, the wives of the king, was beginning 
to take form, certain women ahovi, children of the royal line, were mak­
ing a significant impact on the kingdom's history. It is probably not by 
coincidence that women of the royal lineage were prominent in the early 
years of the kingdom. Few in number and strangers to the Abomey pla­
teau, the Alladahonu, or royal lineage, would not initial1y have had allies 
among the ruling lineages that they were displacing, nor would they have 
felt free to trust the loyalty of persons from lineages who came under 
their control. They would have had reason to enlist all the members of 
their lineage in the effort to establish their own hegemony. 
The organization of the Alladahonu lineage differed structurally from

--- Page 69 ---
52 
From Dahomey's Origins to 1 740 
that of other patrilineages of the Abomey plateau. the difference being 
that the royal lineage affiliated the children of al of its members to itself. 
In other words. in contrast to usual patrilineal practice. children born of 
princesses, women of the royal family. became members of the Allada· 
honu rather than members of their fathers' lines. That difference had 
important implications for the autonomy of princesses. for their involve· 
ment in lineage decisions. and for their ability to participate in the poli· 
tics of the kingdom. Depending upon the ideological vision of the mon· 
archy at any given time. those implications were in turn perceived as 
negative or positive. The affiliation of children of daughters of the Alia· 
dahonu may have been deliberately devised in the early days of the king­
dom to permit the more rapid growth of the lineage. or it may have been 
the continuation of a pattern derived from a matrilineal past. 
The affiliation of their children to the Alladahonu freed the sexuality 
of princesses and made them socially male in patrilineal Fon society. The 
husbands of princesses had no reason, and no right. to try to control their 
sexuality, since the paternity of their children was irrelevant to their lin­
eage affiliation. Princesses were autonomous within the households of 
their husbands. having separate quarters and bringing a large entourage 
of retainers with them. Because princesses did not bear children for an­
other lineage. they were never forced to balance loyalties betwen the 
lineage of their birth and that of their marriage. They were thus free to 
take a more direct role in Alladahonu affairs. A princess was socially 
male. a person in control of her own sexuality, parent to children who 
were members of her own lineage, and head of an entourage that was 
effectively an independent household under her control. 
Among the daughters of each king, the woman acknowledged as the 
most senior was known as na daho (na = honorific for princess; daho = 
large, great). Though she was usually termed the "oldest daughter" in 
European languages, the na daho was not necessarily the firstborn, but 
rather someone senior who was considered to have appropriate leader· 
ship capabilities. Paul Mercier has described patterns of authority and 
power of the "oldest daughter" in lineages in the broad region that in­
cluded Dahomey. the Yoruba.speaking areas, and the kingdom of Ben in.

--- Page 70 ---
From Dahomey's OrIgIns fo 1 740 
53 
The oldest daughter was central to lineage decisions, particularly if she 
was in fact older than the male head of the lineage. She installed new 
lineage heads and. in the interval between the death of one head and the 
installation of his successor, she served as regent. These patterns are 
consistent with evidence from the Dahomean royal family. There, the 
na daho had authority over all the sisters and daughters of the reigning 
king. supervising their marriages and mediating their marital disputes. 
The various na daho become visible from time to time in Dahomean 
history, particularly at moments of succession when, as the oldest child 
of a deceased monarch yet ineligible for the throne herself, na daho might 
use her authority to mediate between rival princes or to promote the 
claims of a would-be king.16 
Princesses were associated with the affairs of state in the early eigh­
teenth century in two capacities: as wife-ambassadors to neighboring 
kings and as senior sisters with authority at periods of succession. Mar­
riage among Gbe-speaking peoples was conceived as an alliance between 
lineages that ideally was cemented through the exchange of wives, with a 
woman of each lineage becoming a wife to the other. Wives. as represen­
tatives of their line in the lineage of their husbands, played a central role 
in determining the nature of continued contacts between the lineages. 
The same principle held true at the level of ruling lineages. Snelgrave 
reported that, fearing an invasion by Oyo cavalry in early 1730, the king 
of Dahomey sent "one of his handsomest daughters" to the king of Oyo 
as part of his peace offerings. Once terms had been negotiated, as "a 
Confirmation of the Peace, the King ofJ-oe sent . . .  one of his Daughters 
to the King of Dahome for a Wife; and she was received with great Joy by 
the King and his People." 17 Dahomean oral tradition similarly speaks of 
Na Geze, a princess married to Houffon, the king ofWhydah at the time 
of the Dahomean invasion of that kingdom. As we will see shortly, legend 
credits Na Geze with helping the Dahomeans under Agaja defeat Whydah. 
Meanwhile, one of the most famous and important princesses of the 
Alladahonu lineage, Na Hangbe, played a central part in the succession 
struggle leading to the reign of Agaja. As senior sister to Agaja at the death 
of his brother and predecessor, Akaba, she used her authority to promote

--- Page 71 ---
54 
From Dahomey's Origins to 1 740 
a candidate for king and may have served as regent during the interreg­
num between Akaba and Ajaga. Her story is set in the second decade of 
the eighteenth century. 
Oral traditions and accounts of travelers begin to converge toward the 
end of the decade of the 171os. At the beginning of 1718. word reached 
Europeans in Whydah of "a Battle between two Kings of Foay." The ref­
erence was very likely to the succession struggle between Agaja and a 
prince remembered in Abomey as Agbo Sassa.ll\ Agaja was brother to his 
predecessor. Akaba. and Agbo Sassa was Akaba's son. Agbo Sassa was sup­
parted by Agaja's powerful sister, Na Hangbe. the twin sister of Akaba. 
Oral tradition further claims that Agaja was originally named Dosu, the 
name for the child born following twins. The implication is that al 
three-Akaba, Hangbe. and Agaja-were born of the same mother. 
Twentieth-century oral accounts about Hangbe's era have several com­
mon refrains: that Akaba died suddenly and prematurely, leaving his son 
Agbo Sassa stil a minor; that Hangbe became regent because she was a 
twin of Akaba, and each one of a pair of twins must be treated equally; 
that Hangbe ruled for three months or three years; and that she had an 
army that ultimately was defeated by Agaja. Variations of the story speak 
of the assassination of Hangbe's son, followed by her public abdication 
and cursing of the people of Dahomey. For good measure, one account 
even adds that she predicted the conquest of Dahomey by whites.'9 
What is the historical reality behind all this? Hangbe is not recognized 
in Dahomean king lists and is not mentioned in any written account 
before the twentieth century. Burton, however, heard of Agbo Sassa 
(Abosasa) during his 1863 visit, and notes that he "stirred up a useless 
war," though Burton mistakenly believes that Agbo Sassa was disputing 
the throne with Akaba, rather than Agaja. Akinjogbin argues that al­
though Hangbe and Akaba were twins, Hangbe certainly never reigned. 
and that to avoid confusion of whether her children or those of Akaba 
should succeed, the "kingmakers" elected Agaja. Because Hangbe is not 
mentioned by precolonial travelers, Law argues that her story "is prob­
ably a later invention, devised to provide a mythical origin" for women 
warriors in Dahomey. He cites an article about her to prove that Agaja 
was named regent. However, the article claims that Agaja became regent

--- Page 72 ---
From Dahomey's Origins to 1 740 
55 
only after Hangbe ruled as regent. Finally, Law acknowledges that the 1718 
report refers to a civil war between Agaja and "a rival claimant to the 
throne," whom he identifies with the name Mbogela-a name that 
Skertchly, and no other source, recorded in the nineteenth century.2() 
There is no reason to doubt the existence of Hangbe. Her descendants 
today live in a compound adjacent to the central palace in Abomey. ru of 
the early 1970s, they could name seven descendants who in succession 
over the years had assumed her identity through positional succession. 
Following Agaja's accesssion to the throne, they say, Hangbe and her 
household remained in the area of Abomey. Agbo Sassa, however, moved 
or fled north to Mahi country, from which his descendants returned to 
settle in Abomey only in the twentieth century. Hangbe's descendants 
credit Gezo, who reigned from 1818 to 185'8, with acting as her benefactor, 
effectively reconstituting her house sometime in the mid -nineteenth 
century.2! 
As twin sister to Akaba, Hangbe would have been na daho. There is a 
sense in the traditions that Akaba died precipitately, possibly in the 
course of warfare; one account claims that he" disappeared," and another 
that he died of poisonY Several claim that Hangbe continued warfare 
begun in the Weme valley under Akaba. Her family even provides the 
name of her general. With the king having died unexpectedly, and with· 
out a clearly designated successor (or one who had the resources ready 
to take contTOl), it would have been normal for Hangbe, as na daho, to 
have played a prominent role in the interregnum and to have served as 
regent. She would not in any sense have been considered to have been 
king, and hence there would have been no reason to make her part of the 
official king list. Later in the eighteenth century, travelers spoke oflapses 
of time as long as eighteen months between the death of one king and 
the public announcement of his death. Grand Customs, the ceremonial 
cycle that marked the final funeral for one king and the installation of his 
successor, typically took place as long as two years following the an· 
nouncernent of the death of the king, ostensibly to allow the successor 
king to make ceremonial preparations. Later patterns of the eighteenth 
century suggest that those preparations included the suppression of rivals 
for the throne. Ironically, Law's argument that the beginning of Agaja's

--- Page 73 ---
56 
From Dahomey's Origins to 1 740 
reign, and hence Akaba's death, occurred in 1716 even lends credence to 
the accounts that Hangbe "reigned" for three years, since it indicates that 
there was no confirmed successor from 1716 to 1718. Hangbe, however, 
promoted the candidacy of the losing prince, and sufered the classic fate 
of the vanquished, being banished from the history constructed by the 
victor,V 
Two other points offer intriguing but undocumented possibilities 
about Hangbe. The first has to do with the suggestion that Hangbe's and 
Akaba's sons each had a claim to the throne. Later Dahomeans asserted 
not only that kings had to be born of royal fathers, but that their mothers 
were always drawn from the ranks of common women. The killing of 
Hangbe's son, which her descendants say was done to prevent him from 
claiming the throne, suggests that things at one time may have been more 
fluid. Scholars have observed that the Alladahonu trace their royal blood 
matrilineally, because in their myth of origins, royal blood is derived 
from the princess of Tado, not the leopard with whom she mated. Nev­
ertheless, by promoting Agbo Sassa and not her own child, Hangbe her­
self was supporting the principle of access to the kingship through the 
male line alone. Finally, the argument that Hangbe was entitled to rule 
by virtue of being a twin is most probably an anachronism drawn from 
later twinning practices. Hangbe's authority was based on her status as 
eldest sister, not as twin to Akaba. The emphasis on her as twin could 
well be related to the reign of Gezo, her benefactor. who in order to le­
gitimize his own rule placed ceremonial emphasis on many forms of 
doubling.24 
The Conquest of Allada and Whydah «::.> 
Outsiders' accounts and oral records agree that the major accomplish­
ment of the period of the reign of Agaja was the conquest of Allada and 
Whydah, which brought Dahomey into direct contact with the coast 
and the European trade. Audaciously expansionist, Dahomey more than 
doubled its land area in a period of three years (1724-27), despite a dev­
astating cavalry attack by the empire of Oyo in 1726. Apart from the usual 
reference to an imperative to expand, oral traditions say virtually nothing 
of the motives of the Dahomean monarchy for its conquest to the coast. 
In contrast, European slavers and twentieth-century scholars have de-

--- Page 74 ---
From Dahomey's Origins to 1 740 
57 
bated motive at great length. John Atkins, who visited Whydah in 1721 as 
physician to a slave-trading expedition, argues that "this Prince (ofDa­
homey) was probably incited to the Conquest from the generous Motive 
of redeeming his own, and the neigboring Country People from those 
cruel Wars, and Slavery that was continually imposed on them." Writing 
more than two hundred years later, I. A. Akinjogbin draws on Atkins to 
argue that Agaja wanted first to destroy the existing political system in 
the area and, second, "to restrict and eventually stop the slave trade . . .  
and to substitute other 'legitimate' items of trade between Europe and 
the new kingdom of Dahomey." Though the possibility that an African 
monarch tried to put an end to the slave trade is obviously attractive in 
the twentieth century, historians who have closely considered the evi­
dence from Dahomey suggest, as did the eighteenth-century slave trad­
ers, that Dahomey's motive was a desire to trade directly with Europe, 
and that the kingdom was willing to provide the product most desired 
by European traders, human beings. Akinjogbin's thesis therefore is not 
likely. However, both Atkins's idea that Dahomey wanted to stop raids 
on its own people and the argument that the Dahomeans were seeking 
direct overseas commerce in slaves are conceivable. In the political at­
mosphere of the early eighteenth century, with tiny states warring and 
selling captives, and where the choice was trading or being traded, mili­
tary expansion and conquest would have allowed Dahomey to attack and 
stop potential raiders of its population and, by selling captives, to acquire 
the means to strengthen its state further.Z5 
If oral sources are silent on the question of motives for the conquest 
to the coast, they are deeply interested in the mechanics of conquest, and 
of the defeat of Whydah in particular. The Whydah story merits close 
attention, because it provides insights into patterns of African oral inter­
pretation that contrast with Western interpretive modes of history. Those 
contrasts in turn have implications for our understanding of the conduct 
and meaning of warfare in Dahomey. The difference between the two 
interpretive modes lies in the answers provided to explain the taking of 
Savi, the capital ofWhydah, by the Dahomeans in 1727. First, we need to 
outline the "facts" of the taking of Allada and Whydah as they are gen­
erally accepted by twentieth-century historians. 
The Dahomeans had been growing continually stronger in the first

--- Page 75 ---
58 
From Dahomey's Origins to J 740 
two decades of the eighteenth century, warring with some success in the 
Weme valley in the 1710S. Their objective may have been to secure a trade 
route east of AUada to outlets to the sea east of Lake Nokoue, an objective 
that apparently was successful. Following the succession struggle that 
brought Agaja to power around 1716-18, the Dahomeans became in­
volved in Allada politics. In 1724, they attacked Allada in a bloody, three­
day battle ostensibly fought in favor of a claimant to the throne. In the 
end, however, Agaja took effective control over the kingdom of Allada. 
Defeated elements from Allada and the Weme area then appealed to Oyo, 
which in 1726 attacked Dahomey with cavalry and destroyed its army. 
Agaja, who had fled with his entourage. sent tribute to Oye to buy peace 
and the right to occupy Allada. In the meantime, Agaja is said to have tried 
to negotiate with Houffon, the king ofWhydah, requesting permission for 
Dahomean traders to trade directly at Whydah. By refusing Agaja's re­
quest, Houffon conveniently provided a casus belli. From their base in Al­
lada, the Dahomeans attacked and burned towns on the northern edges of 
Whydah control, despite opposition from a Whydah force described as 
more than ten times larger (three thousand Dahomeans versus forty thou­
sand Hwedas). Arriving at the river that separated them from Savi on 
March 6, 1727, the Dahomeans halted. On March 9, when a small party of 
Dahomeans crossed the river, Whydah resistance collapsed, the king fled, 
and the city fel without opposition. The Dahomeans went on to devastate 
the kingdom, killing an estimated five thousand persons and taking ten 
thousand to eleven thousand prisoner.16 
The mystery, of course, is why the Whydah defenses collapsed so pre­
cipitately and Savi was taken so easily, something that apparently surprised 
even the Dahomean victors at the time. Akinjogbin and Law provide ex­
planations from a Western explanatory mode. They stress first that Why­
dah had been weakened by its internal divisions-and indeed, European 
correspondence for nearly two decades prior to the conquest chronicles 
various machinations at the court of Houffon. Law adds "treachery" (by 
people in Whydah) and "guile" (by Dahomeans) to his explanation, not­
ing in the first instance that some of the Whydah chiefs may have gone 
over to Agaja's side even before the Dahorneans arrived. Law's evidence 
for guile is drawn from the oral account published by Le Herisse, which

--- Page 76 ---
From Dahomey's Origins to 1 740 
59 
argues, first, that Na Geze, the daughter of Agaja who was married to 
Houffon, poured water on the Whydah gunpowder the night before the 
attack and. second. that Agaja put the Hweda off their guard by publicly 
announcing that he was going to Allada to perform religious ceremonies. 
Law finds Agaja's ruse-by-departure credible (his presence at Allada is 
confirmed in contemporary European accounts), but Na Geze's actions 
"no more than a traditional stereotype." Akinjogbin, in contrast, gives 
credence to the Na Geze story and. in addition, finds another explanation 
for the Dahomean victory: the lack of defensive action by the European 
traders at Savi. He quotes Snelgrave to argue that the Dahomeans neu­
tralized possible European intervention by promising to make the trade 
more attractive, should they prevailP 
Neither Akinjogbin nor Law provides details of the oral traditions 
about Na Geze. Her full story follows the classic lines of myth, in that it 
purports to explain a historical event-the unexpected capture of Savi. 
Like many myths, it is recounted in the fonn of a dramatic tale. And like 
myths, even as it describes details of events that almost certainly never 
happened, it resonates with the truths of popular conceptions and offers 
insights about history. The following summary of the myth is drawn from 
Gavoy's rendition of 1913. 
Agaja gave Na Geze to Houffon in marriage as a sign of friend­
ship and alliance between the two kings. Known also by the name 
Awliponuwe (meaning young girl, go and see), Na Geze acted as a 
spy, learning the key to Houffon's strengths in order to defeat him. 
Agaja had bought flintlock guns through Whydah. However, the 
Hwedas had removed the hammer, which forced the Dahomeans 
to fire them by having a second soldier stand next to the gunman 
and light the powder by hand. Na Geze charmed Houffon into ex­
plaining why Agaja's guns worked so badly and convinced him to 
give her access to the storehouse where the hammers were stored. 
She then visited her father, returning with a large number of ser­
vants and forty young women (forty and forty-one being numbers 
that were associated both with royalty and with ideas of perfection 
or completenesss). Since this entourage was too great to be easily

--- Page 77 ---
60 
From Dahomey's Origins to 1 740 
accommodated, Na Geze announced that she was sending all the 
male servants home. They returned to Agaja with the missing ham· 
mers. Having repaired his guns, Agaja then complained to Houffon 
who, in an expression of defiance, confiscated Na Geze's people, 
giving the forty women to his chiefs and the remaining servants to 
his warriors. Agaja then demanded and received compensation for 
Houffon's seizure of Na Geze's retainers. Next, Na Geze received 
a large quantity of food and palm wine from her father so that she 
could entertain the Hweda. The ensuing party left the king and 
chiefs drWlk, and Na Geze's servants went off to wet the king's 
and chiefs' gunpowder. The Dahomeans were then able to attack 
and win.28 
There is a final explanatory story about Savi that is not mentioned by 
either Law or Akinjogbin. Snelgrave says that the people of Whydah re­
lied solely on their principal deity, a python, to protect their capital. 
Rather than setting a guard at the riverbank, the Hweda "only went every 
Morning and Evening to the River side, to offer Sacrifice to their princi­
pal God, which was a particular harmJess Snake they adored, and prayed 
to on this occasion, to keep their Enemies from coming over the river." 
Snelgrave continues that "there is a constant Tradition amongst them, 
whenever any Calamity threatens their Country, by imploring the Snake's 
Assistance, they are always delivered from it." He reports that "the Pass 
of the River being . . .  wholly left to the Care of the Snakes, whom the 
Enemy little feared; and they having observed for several Days, that the 
Whidaws kept no set Guard there, it encouraged the King of Dahome's 
General to send two hundred of his Soldiers to ford the River: Which 
having done without Opposition . . .  they marched towards the Town . . . .  
The Outguards . . .  fled into the Town, reporting, that al the Dahome 
Army was got over the River: Which soon reaching the King's Ear, he 
immediately fled, with al his People, making no Resistance." Having 
failed to protect Whydah. the snakes suffered along with the general 
population, being killed and eaten by the Dahomeans. Snelgrave com­
ments that "it is very strange, I the Conquerors should so far contemn 
the Gods of this Country. since they are so barbarous and savage them­
selves, as to offer human Sacrifices whenever they gain a Victory." 29

--- Page 78 ---
From Dahomey's Origins to 1 740 
6' 
Obviously, both Law and Akinjogbin work in a Western interpretive 
mode, accepting evidence that they perceive as reasonable by Western 
historical standards. Those standards offer a range of acceptable ex­
planations for victory in warfare: better strategy or tactics, greater fire­
power, more technologically advanced weaponry. greater numbers of 
combatants, disunity or treason in enemy ranks, surprise. advantages 
of terrain. unexpected changes in weather, and sheer good luck. In addi­
tion, they allow for victory gained as a result of certain beliefs within the 
ranks of the winning combatants: that the winners were fighting for 
families or homelands, that defeat would mean death, or that God or 
rightness was on their side. 
The Dahomean explanatory mode, in contrast, seems little concerned 
with typical Western explanatory factors. Rather, victory is more often 
explained by certain patterns, two of which are particularly important. 
The first argues that success is won by learning the source of an enemy's 
strength and neutralizing it. It applies both to material and to super­
natural or spiritual power. The second pattern argues that victory is won 
by outsmarting the enemy through some kind of ruse. In both. fight­
ing simply confirms an outcome already foreordained. Obviously. the 
Na Geze legend includes both patterns. Na Geze learns the source of 
Houffon's strength-properly working firearms-and neutralizes it by 
sending the flintlock hammers to Agaja and wetting the gunpowder. At 
the same time, she employs a classic ruse. getting the enemy drunk, to 
complete the preparations for the battle. which of course is irrelevant, the 
outcome having already been assured. The Na Geze myth is typical, too, 
in personalizing the strength of the enemy. focusing on the interpersonal 
relations of Na Geze, Houffon, and Agaja. 
But what of snakes and rivers as explanation? Snelgrave arrived in 
Whydah three weeks after the conquest of the kingdom. What he col­
lected was not a myth embellished by years of retelling but the kind of 
tale that would have reached twentieth-century Europeans through the 
whispers of their African servants and that would have been dismissed 
by them as superstitious kitchen gossip. Snelgrave. however, lived in a 
pre-Enlightenment world that was willing to consider alternative belief 
systems, and he accepts the snake story as one of several explanatory 
factors. In fact, it fits the patterns of the Dahomean explanatory moCle,

--- Page 79 ---
62 
From Dahomey's Origins to 1 740 
arguing that the strength ofWhydah was contained in its national vodun, 
its supernatural protector. Certainly, the setting-with the Dahomeans 
stopping north of the river-is replete with factors inexplicable in "ratio­
nal" terms. The river that forced the Dahomean army to halt was hardly 
a major physical obstacle. Caned "a pretty deep and rapid river" by an 
eighteenth-century source,30 the river in the twentieth century was a 
small stream that was part of the network of channels making up the 
lagoon area of the coast. Early March, the period of the attack, is the end 
of the dry season, when the stream would have been at the lowest level of 
the year; indeed, in the end the Dahomeans simply walked across it. Hav­
ing easily defeated Whydah armies before, and seeing no defenses at the 
stream, why would they have hesitated for several days? Did the Hweda 
truly believe that their god would protect them? And if so, did the Da­
homeans stop because they feared the power of that same god? In that 
case, why would any Dahomeans have dared to cross the river-and dis­
cover the fatal weakness of Whydah's divine defense? Snelgrave's descrip­
tion of the Dahomeans killing and eating pythons tends to substantiate 
the possibility that both sides believed in the efficacy of supernatural pro­
tection. According to him, the Dahomeans held up captured pythons, 
taunted them by saying, "If you are Gods, speak and save your selves," 
and then beheaded and broiled them. In later years, Dahomey would 
show extreme respect for the protector gods of any enemy locality, send­
ing royal spies to neutralize them before attacks and often reestablishing 
in Dahomey the enemy vodun that were believed to be powerful. The 
python cult, though it was brought back to Abomey by the conquerors 
and though it did remain the central vodun of Whydah, never became 
a prominent deity on the Abomey plateau. The python's relative lack of 
popularity may have been associated with its failure in Dahomean eyes to 
protect Whydah from attack. 
Both the Na Geze legend and Snelgrave's snake account remind us that 
there is one final crucial explanatory factor for understanding Dahomean 
warfare, and more broadly for understanding the actions of people gen­
erally in Dahomean history. In the same way that the beliefs of Western 
soldiers can be considered a factor in the outcome of war, the beliefs of 
the Dahomeans and their enemies are central to understanding historic 
warfare in the Dahomey gap. In short, people act on their beliefs, not on

--- Page 80 ---
From Dahomey's Origins to 1 740 
63 
the " reality" that historians create in hindsight. Dahomey was without 
question a militaristic state, and Dahomean soldiers fought. killed. and 
died in battle; nevertheless, their approach to warfare, their understand­
ing of enemy strengths and weaknesses, their desire to fight, and their 
willingness to die-all these were related to realities that Dahomeans 
perceived and that may not be shared by twentieth-century individuals. 
A5 in other areas of their lives, Dahomeans were quick to adopt European 
technologies for warfare. but they adapted those European means to Da­
homean beliefs and Dahomean ends. At this distance, we cannot know 
precisely what the two sides in fact believed in 1727. But we can know that 
both sides acted on their beliefs and that it is very possible that Snelgrave 
learned something about what people believed. 
The fact that Snelgrave did not record (and presumably did not hear) 
the legend of Na Geze suggests that her story was created at a later point 
in Dahomean history. Nevertheless, it, too, tells us something about what 
Dahomeans believed at some later point in their history. That had to do 
with the role and behavior of princesses in the homes of their husbands: 
that a princess was loyal to her father and not her husband. that she 
would report her husband's secrets to her father, and that she would be­
tray her husband to promote the interests of her father. By the nineteenth 
century, when Dahomean notables were offered princesses as wives, 
daughters of the king were widely believed to be royal spies. And men 
favored by the king would consider that his gift of a princess-bride was a 
dubious honor at best. 
Customs. Court, and the Palace In the Early 1 700s  
Dahomey's rapid expansion signaled the beginning of a period of disrup­
tion and difficulty for the monarchy. The sudden military conquest of 
states covering a land area larger than the Abomey plateau raised major 
problems of control. Moreover, the victory over Whydah was not defini­
tive: Houffon, the Whydah king, had escaped to the west and he would 
return more than once to try to retake his kingdom. The Abomey plateau 
had been overrun by Oyo horsemen and remained vulnerable, and the 
king and his entourage were forced to flee nearly every dry season. Work 
began on a deep ditch that would enclose the city of Abomey and serve 
as a first defense. Forty years later, it was described as a "wide and deep

--- Page 81 ---
64 
From Dahomey's Origins to 1 740 
ditch" punctuated in four places by wooden bridges with guard houses.31 
Nevertheless, by 1730 the court had moved to Allada, where it would 
remain until Agaja's death in 1740, and even there peace was elusive, 
Dahomey alternately showing its strength and then being forced to re· 
treat. When Oyo attacked the Dahomeans, the Hweda would throw off 
Dahomean control. Once peace with Oyo was regained (or once the rains 
forced the Oyo horsemen to retreat), Dahomey would move to reesta· 
blish control over the coast. In the newly conquered areas the habits of 
banditry appeared to die slowly, and if European accounts are to be be· 
lieved, the Dahomeans did little more than devastate the lands of Allada 
and Whydah that they had conquered. In fact, contemporary sources 
suggest that administrative roughness and a scarcity of discipline char· 
acterized the Dahomean state organization in the first third of the eigh· 
teenth century. In particular, the European sources make clear that the 
Dahomeans lacked sophistication in dealing with the culture of inter· 
action between African and European that had evolved on the coast. 
Trade terms negotiated with the king were sometimes not honored by 
Dahomean traders at the coast; the Dahomeans broke promises, occa­
sionally imprisoned traders, and even executed one, a director of the 
English fort by the name ofTestefol, who tried to help the Hweda regain 
control over their territory. Supplies of slaves were intermittent and 
when Europeans complained of these problems of the trade to the king 
of Dahomey, he argued that he had no control over his subordinates. 
Despite the pressures on the Dahomean monarchy and the negative 
reports from European traders, there are signs during the reign of Agaja 
that Dahomey had begun to establish the elaborate ceremonial life and 
administrative control that characterized the state by the nineteenth cen· 
tury. By the mid·1720S, Europeans were beginning to record eyewitness 
accounts of the Dahomean court. The records of two English visitors, 
Bulfinch Lamb and Wiliam Snelgrave, are particularly rich. Lamb, in 
AIlada at the time of the 1724 conquest, was captured by the Dahomeans 
and taken to Abomey, where he spent two years as an honored visitorl 
prisoner. Snelgrave was received by the king in 1727 at a site that was 
probably the location of the Dahomean palace in modern Allada. Both 
suggest an impressive level of wealth, administrative organization, and 
social discipline.)2

--- Page 82 ---
From Dahomey's Origins to I 740 
65 
Both Lamb and Snelgrave witnessed ceremonial cycles of the kind that 
would later be called Annual Customs. Lamb wrote that the king was 
"obliged to go out at different times in the year, and strow great quanti­
ties of goods and money amongst the common people, and make sacri­
fices to . . .  gods and forefathers. sometimes of slaves . . .  sometimes of 
horses, other times of oxen, and other creatures." Snelgrave arrived in 
Allada just one month after the 1727 fall of Savi and at the end of a war 
against Toffo (or Tufoe, north of Allada on a route to Abomey). He spent 
six days on a visit that is a prototype of the pattern of later Europeans' 
experience of Dahomean ceremonial cycles. Traveling by hammock, with 
two other traders and a Jakin official, he was greeted on arrival in Al1ada 
by a high Dahomean official. Once settled in his quarters, he received 
livestock and food provided for his sustenance and went off for an initial 
audience with the king. Snelgrave later watched military maneuvers and 
observed the payment of compensation by the king for captives and 
heads taken in war. He saw humans being sacrificed (later visitors often 
refused to watch), witnessed "ridiculous" rituals "which would be tedi­
ous for me to relate," and was told of other ceremonies to which he was 
not invited (e.g., the "King's Fetiche Day" ). He learned that the king was 
also busy receiving ambassadors from "inland" countries. Finally, having 
negotiated his business with the king (agreeing to conditions of trade and 
prices of slaves), Sne1grave and his party were given gifts and departedY 
The accounts of both Lamb and Snelgrave touch on the central ele­
ments of state power-religious/ideological, military, and political/eco­
nomic-and how they were reinforced through the ceremonial cycle. 
Snelgrave watched soldiers return from war with numerous prisoners 
and heads of enemy dead. The living were divided into two groups: those 
to be sacrificed to the king's " Guardian Angel" and those to be kept or 
sold. Snelgrave watched a person he presumed to be a priest lay his hand 
upon sacrifice victims' heads and speak "about two Minutes" before they 
were decapitated. Their blood, he was told, was "for the Fetiche, or God." 
When Snelgrave queried a Dahomean army officer about why sacrifices 
were made, he was told that after every conquest, a certain number of 
captives were sacrificed, "For they firmly believed. should this be omit­
ted, no more Success would attend them." Moreover, some of the sacri­
fice victims were being sent to be, after death, servants to the twelve royal

--- Page 83 ---
66 
From Dahomey's Origins to 1 740 
wives who had been killed by the Tuffos and whose deaths had precipi­
tated the war.34 
Snelgrave, obviously. was seeing confirmed the central principles of 
Dahomean religious belief: that there was mutual interdependence be­
tween the spirit and the visible worlds, with the blood of sacrifice victims 
nourishing a "Guardian Angel" who would reciprocate by ensuring fu­
ture victories. The "priest" was likely imparting a message, for persons 
sacrificed were normally instructed to perform one of two services after 
death: to carry messages to the world of the dead or to staf households 
of deceased individuals. At the same time, their blood provided nourish­
ment for the deities. But there was more, because the act of sacrifice was 
also a political act. In a society where wealth was measured in terms of 
the numbers of dependents under a person's control. human sacrifice 
signaled the greatest possible expenditure of wealth. It also signaled mili­
tary power and an implicit threat to Dahomey's neighbors, for those who 
were sacrificed were captives of war. Snelgrave's traveling companion, the 
Jakin official, arrived at his tent at one point terrified at having seen 
people going to be sacrificed. If Snelgrave is to be believed, the man's 
greatest fear was that the Dahomeans would sacrifice him and eat his 
body. Rumors of Dahomean cannibalism were believed by Snelgrave, 
though he had no more direct evidence of cannibalism than the thou­
sands of Africans who believed that Europeans ate slaves. Nevertheless, 
the Dahomeans on their way to war would have found it useful to have 
neighboring peoples believe that they were cannibals. That was very likely 
the reason that messages of power were sent during this period through 
the decoration of palace walls with the skulls of people killed in war or 
sacrificed. But military power in Dahomey was not left just to the spirit­
world's protection, to rumars of cannibalism. or to the implicit threat of 
execution: Snelgrave carefully notes that, not only were the Dahomean 
soldiers armed with guns and swords, but that their public demonstra­
tions indicated a discipline and order "well worth seeing even by us 
Europeans." 35 
Finally, both Lamb and Snelgrave noticed (and participated in as re­
cipients) the public presentation of gifts by the monarchy to the people. 
Largesse was a central element of ceremonial cycles, with the kings-aided 
at times by European visitors and members of the court-throwing cloth

--- Page 84 ---
From Dahomey's Origins to 1 740 
67 
and cowries to crowds of people. Snelgrave estimates that the king gave 
"at least two hundred Captives" to courtiers and officers during his visit. 
The gesture was quintessentially West African. It was the patron bestow­
ing gifts on the client. It was the chief giving gifts to attract followers. It 
was also a reenactment of the relationship between the living and the dead, 
and, like that relationship, it expressed mutual interdependence, because 
the gift-giving was not simply from the monarchy to the people. Neither 
Snelgrave nor Lamb noticed what was without question a part of the cere­
monial process: the contributions of the people to the monarch. Losers in 
war paid tribute to victors, clients and followers owed something to pa­
trons and chiefs. The monarchy of Dahomey by the nineteenth century 
would have a system of taxation worthy of any twentieth-century industri­
alized government. It is clear that at least portions ofit were in place in the 
1720S, when even in Whydah, William Smith, who arrived there a month 
after the fall of Savi, learned that the "King of Dahomey . . .  has now laid 
heavy Taxes upon [the people ofWhydahJ."36 
Beyond their observations of the ceremonial cycle, Lamb and Snelgrave 
confirm that certain characteristics of the Dahomean palace organization 
were already in place by the 1720S. Lamb testifies that the king's palaces 
covered vast areas, that he had many of them, that his Abomey palace 
with two thousand wives was "as big as a small Town," and that it was 
governed competently by the king's wives. Eunuchs had been used in the 
palace in Allada and had been captured by the conquering Dahomeans, 
but for the time being they were not used in Dahomean palaces.37 The 
daklo already was in evidence, distancing the king's male leaders from 
direct conversation with the monarch. Snelgrave wrote that "the princi­
pal Men of the Court and Army" never went nearer than twenty feet 
from the king. "Whatsoever they had to say to his Majesty, first kissing 
the Ground. they whispered into the Ear of an old Woman, who went to 
the king; and having received his answer, she returned with it to them." 
At Snelgrave's first audience, the king was attended by seven women who 
"had on their Arms, many large Manelloes, or Rings of Gold and of great 
Value, and round their Necks, and in their Hair, abundance of their 
Country Jewels, which are a sort of Beads of divers Colours." Three of 
the women shaded the king with umbrellas. which in Dahomey as else­
where in West Africa were symbols of high rank. Of greater importance,

--- Page 85 ---
68 
From Dahomey's OrIgIns to 1 740 
though, were the four other women. They stood with muskets on their 
shoulders. Lamb similarly described armed wives of the king, attending 
his person and holding "guns, pistols, and sabre, &c.")8 
The arming of palace women with guns set Dahomey apart from its 
neighbors. There appears to have been no precedent for it, and it was a 
crucial step that led to Dahomey's nineteenth-century army of women. 
Women as fighters were not unheard-of in eighteenth-century West 
Africa. A Dutch visitor to Akwamu (in present-day Ghana) in 1703 came 
upon a village where " everyone had a sword in his hand, men as well as 
women." Olaudah Equiano, an Igbo kidnapped into the slave trade in 
the eighteenth century, remembered that in the interior of what is now 
Nigeria, both women and men farmed, fought, and were "trained in the 
arts of war." The king ofOyo was reported to have a force offive hundred 
wives armed with spears in the early nineteenth century. Women were 
not considered to be physically weak in Dahomey and were widely re­
ported being involved in farming. Dahomean traditions linked farming 
to fighting by claiming that the main weapon of Dahomey, before fire­
arms, was a club derived from a short-handled hoe. Bosman describes 
it, saying that in the 1690S it was the principal weapon in Whydah and 
Allada, "a sort of Club about a Yard long, and five or six inches thick, 
very round and even, except a Knot at the Bottom, the breadth of a Hand, 
and three Fingers thick." Given these cultural traditions, it is hardly sur­
prising that Lamb reported that the guards for the palace entrances were 
"a robusk sort of women slaves" or that Snelgrave reported that the Da­
homeans met a 1729 challenge from the Hweda by adding detachments 
of women to their forces.39 
What may be unusual, then, is not that women might be seen as ca­
pable of fighting, but that they would have been armed with firearms. 
During the colonial period and later, as new European technologies were 
introduced into Africa, they typically became the preserve of men. More­
over, guns were relatively new in Dahomey in the 1720S. The explanation 
for the firearms of the palace women undoubtedly lies in the women's 
function as bodyguards to the king. Women were said to have been body­
guards as early as the reign of Wegbaja, though as the putative first king, 
many innovations are attributed (and possibly misattributed) to his

--- Page 86 ---
From Dahomey's OrIgIns (0 1 740 
69 
reign. Whatever their beginnings, the presence of the king's female guard 
signaled that the monarchy was already conceiving of the palace organi­
zation as something beyond a polygynous household. Armed women 
continued to be present at audiences and visible at the palace gates. To 
assure personal loyalty, each king founded his own guard, though appar­
ently without disbanding the guard established by his predecessors. And 
as we will see, the guards' members played prominent roles in virtually 
all succession struggles up to and including that of Gezo in 1818.40 
Snelgrave and Lamb provide Little evidence about court officials cen­
tral to the monarchy at this period. Snelgrave, for example, identifies the 
official who greeted him at Allada only as "the principal person of 
[Aga;a's] Court," with the title of "Great Captain." Prior to the 1740S, the 
only Dahomean office mentioned by name in contemporary sources is 
that of the migan (mi = our, gan 
= chief, director). Called the temigan 
or chemigan by most eighteenth-century writers, the migan was adviser 
to the king and also royal executioner, effectively a prime minister who 
remained central to the kings' administrations throughout the history of 
the kingdom. Oral traditions claim that the office predated the arrival of 
the Alladahonu on the Abomey plateau. As executioner, the migan per­
formed ritual as well as judicial functions, since many of the people killed 
under his direction were sacrifices to the ancestors. Indeed, the "priest" 
that Snelgrave saw at Customs may have been the migan. Toward the end 
of the eighteenth century, Chenevert and Bulet would insist on the cen­
trality of the migan's office by claiming that he alone of all Dahomeans 
could never be executed by the king, but could only be exiJed.1 
The usually reliable Le Herisse claims that the officer commonly called 
second minister, the meu, was created under Agaja's successor, Tegbesu. 
However, the office may have existed earlier, for Norris was told that the 
meu and the migan had selected Tegbesu to be king at the time of the 
death of Agaja, which would indicate that the office existed during Agaja's 
reign. As the minister charged with the oversight of territories south of 
Allada, the meu was responsible for the reception of European visitors 
from the coast and hence was highly visible in the accounts of European 
travelers. Later descriptions of Dahomean offices typicaUy link the migan 
and the meu as complements, The migan, associated with the right hand

--- Page 87 ---
70 
From Dahomey's Origins to J 740 
of the king, was responsible for commoners; the meu, linked to the king's 
left. had authority over members of the royal family.42 
Several other major offices existed during the reign of Agaja. Le Herisse 
says that the first yovogan (yovo = white person; gan = chief, director), 
an office that had existed both in Allada and Whydah, was appointed by 
Aga;a. Law has shown that the title was not used by Dahomey until the 
time of Aga;a's successor, though earlier there were individuals, most 
importantly an officer called the tegan, who were responsible for what 
became the functions of the yovogan -relations with the European trad­
ers and the governing of Whydah. Two military offices. the commander 
in chief, or gau, and the POSti, a subordinate, are mentioned by writers in 
the 173os, and quite possibly they existed prior to that period.4) 
Even when they are available, the names of offices tell us little of the 
individuals who filed them or of the extent of the power that they exer­
cised. Observing Whydah in the 1720S, the French naval officer Chevalier 
des Marchais claimed preponderant powers for the great ministers in 
comparison with the king; however, he was examining a kingdom that 
was deeply divided and that had a weak king. The Dahomean kings, at 
least in this period, seem to have been wary of their ministers' power. 
The 1730S and 1740s, the last decade of Agaja's reign and the first of Teg­
besu's, have been described as a period of "internal crisis" by Robin Law. 
Both kings were challenged by mutinous officers, at least some of whom 
were members of the royal family, and executions of various chiefs were 
relatively commonplace.44 
Women's offices and powerful women are virtually invisible in this pe­
riod, save for two examples. The first is that of Adonon, the king's reign­
mate, to be discussed below. Adonon's history was retained through the 
oral tradition and is not mentioned in contemporary European accounts. 
The second example, recorded by Snelgrave, is a frustratingly tantalizing 
hint that women were important at court. His story concerns an incident 
that took place sometime between April 15 and July I, 1727. The king's 
agent offered two women to Snelgrave for sale, one about fifty years old 
and the other about twenty, with the stipulation that "I would not let 
them be redeemed by any one that should offer to do it." Snelgrave of­
fered to take the younger only. The following day he was told by his

--- Page 88 ---
From Dahomey's Origins to 1 740 
71 
Dahomean translator that the older woman-the one he had refused to 
buy-had that day "been sacrificed to the Sea. by order ofthe great Cap­
tain, For she had highly offended the King)" and since Snelgrave would not 
take her, "his Majesty had ordered her to be destroyed this way." When 
Snelgrave asked the translator what crimes the woman had committed, he 
replied hastily) "Did I think he knew the King's Secrets?" adding, "She had 
lived a long time in the Court, with good Repute til now." LaterSnelgrave 
learned that, without the Dahomeans knowing of it, his own crew had 
saved the woman from drowning. When he questioned her, she would 
not divulge the reason for the king's displeasure, and he appears to have 
been satisfied with his translator's guess that "he suspected, it was on 
account of her assisting some of the King's Women in their Amours." 
Snelgrave noted that this woman was known by a number of the slaves 
on board and used her influence on behalf of the slave traders: "The 
female Negroes, who used always to be the most troublesome to us, on 
account of the noise and clamour they made, were kept in such Order 
and Decorum by this Woman, that I had never the like in any Voyage 
before." 45 
Some sources claim that royal blood was not allowed to be spilled 
and hence that problem ahovi (children of the king) were drowned at 
Whydah or sold overseas. Although that prohibition was not strictly 
practiced at the time of succession struggles, it is possible that the woman 
in this case was a member of the royal family. Her influence over the Fan 
slaves resonates with the na daho's influence over female members of the 
royal line. ru might be expected. oral records provide no clues to the 
woman's identity. In the absence of any other information, we cannot say 
with certainty if she was a member of the royal lineage, let alone who she 
was. Nevertheless, the story confirms that women were influential at 
court, and that the identity of powerful women was known to persons 
outside the palace even at this relatively early date.­ 
Adonon and the Creation of the Office of Kpojito  
The establishment of the most important women's office in Dahomey, 
that ofkpojito, appears to date to the reign of Agaja. Kpojito. commonly 
translated into European languages as "mother of the king" or "queen

--- Page 89 ---
72 
From Dahomey's Origins to 1 740 
mother," means literally the one who whelped the leopard (kpo = ieop­
ard;ji = to engender; to = agent). Each king was doubled by a kpojito, a 
woman drawn from among his predecessor's wives. She had a separate 
court and entourage within the central Abomey palace and was forbid­
den all contacts with men. Dahomean and European sources are gener­
ally vague about the formal functions of her office. At least in the nine­
teenth century, the kpojito heard appeals in religious cases from the court 
of the ajaho, the minister of religion, with final appeal to the king himself. 
The kpojito is said to have acted as an intercessor with the king, giving 
refuge to Dahomean subjects and pleading on their behalf to the king. 
Reputed to be very wealthy, the kpojito was supported by tributary vil­
lages and plantations of slaves. After death, she was replaced by a female 
descendant in the family of her birth who controlled her estate. Like the 
kings, the kpojito became vodun and was honored as part of the annual 
cycle of ceremonies. Mid-nineteenth-century witnesses write that the 
spirit of Adonon, the "mother of Agaja," was given offerings first, and 
that the ceremonies for her were followed by those for the kpo;ito asso­
ciated with the kings who came after AgajaY This ceremonial primacy of 
Adonon, combined with the nature of the oral traditions about her, make 
it likely that the office ofkpojito was established during the time of Agaja. 
Since the interpretation of Adonon that I offer here is based on the ar­
gument that the Alladahonu lineage needed to legitimize itself in the eyes 
of its subjects on the Abomey plateau, and since the rulers of Dahomey 
had little time to deal with problems on the plateau following the con­
quest of Allada and Whydah, I date the creation of the office of kpojito 
to the six-year window betw"een Agaja's establishment of his rule in about 
1718 and the attack on Whydah in 1724. 
Adonon was from the town of Wassa, about fifteen miles southeast of 
Abomey. Her story is directly linked to the myth of the founding of the 
royal lineage through the mating of a leopard with a princess of the royal 
line ofTado. The Tado princess. the myth tells us, was named Aligbonon. 
Both she and her leopardlike son, Agasu, were considered tohwiyo, 
vodun-founders of the Alladahonu lineage. However, traditions also link 
Aligbonon to Adonon. Tado. the supposed home of Aligbonon. was west 
of the Abomey plateau in present-day Togo, but tado (or sado) is also a

--- Page 90 ---
From Dahomey's Origins to 1 740 
73 
term that in contemporary Fongbe usage signifies simply place of origin. 
Wassa, the home village of Adonon, is also cited in oral tradition as the 
place of origin of Aligbonon, and in fact Aligbonon was a prominent 
vodun there. Some oral accounts say that Adonon was Aligbonon, or that 
Adonon became AJigbonon, and others that Aligbonon was given to 
Adonon "to guard." The phrasing is similar to that commonly used to 
describe the relationship of a priest to her vodun, suggesting that Adonon 
was a vodunon. or priest, of Aligbonon.4$ 
Oral traditions in the twentieth century also claim that the Alladahonu 
lineage can be traced back in an unbroken line to the kings of Allada. As 
noted above, recent historians have questioned the Dahomean royal lin­
eage's link to the royal family of Allada. Robin Law argues that the AlIada 
connection was invented in the second half of the eighteenth century. In 
light of the conquest of Allada by Dahomey, a story of kinship with Allada 
was "part of an attempt to clothe the authority which Dahomey had 
acquired by force in a cloak of traditional dynastic legitimacy." The 
Dahomean ruling dynasty presumably used the name Alladahonu, mean­
ing the people from Allada, in preference to Agasuvi (children of Agasu) to 
underline their claims to descent from Allada. Law also observes that the 
claim to origins in Tado (Togo) was actually an element of the myth of the 
Allada royal lineage that the Dahomey royal myth borrowed. These argu­
ments support the suggestion that Aligbonon. the mother of Agasu. was 
more appropriately associated with the town of Wasa on the Aborney 
plateau.49 
Apart from the fictions of origins in Tado and of descent from the 
AlJada royal lineage. there is a curious inconsistency in the mythic gene­
alogy of the Dahomey royal lineage. Dakodonu was supposedly a son of 
an Allada prince who migrated north and settled in Wawe. Having then 
established Dahomey, Dakodonu was followed by his son Wegbaja, who 
was recognized as the first king of the Dahomean dynasty. The myth does 
not explain why Dakodonu, who created the kingdom, was simply a 
chief, a "mere captain," to quote Burton. while Wegbaja was remem­
bered as the first real king. Traditions collected in the Abomey area from 
families other than the Alladahonu provide a probable answer: that 
Dakodonu was not a member of the Alladahonu lineage. 50

--- Page 91 ---
74 
From Dahomey's Origins to 1 740 
What do all of these complicated myths and countermyths have to do 
with the establishment of the office of kpojito? The answer lies with the 
problem of legitimacy. The Dahomean royal dynasty appears to have es­
tablished itself and expanded across the Abomey plateau by force alone. 
Yet typically in Africa, there was believed to be a sacred link between the 
earth and the people who lived in a locality. In effect, the earth belonged 
to supernatural forces and humans enjoyed what were only usufructory 
rights to it, with responsibility for the maintenance of a sacred contract 
with the earth held by the lineage recognized as having first arrived. In­
vading lineages normally made some kind of ceremonial accommoda­
tion with these local religious authorities, variously called "earth priests" 
or "owners of the land." in order to legitimize their claims to rule. The 
Alladahonu, on the other hand, do not appear initially to have recog­
nized these ritual authorities, which would have made them illegitimate 
rulers in the eyes of their subjects. The adoption of Dakodonu into the 
Alladahonu dynasty and the creation of the office of kpojito appear to 
have been related attempts to legitimize the ruling lineage and thus gain 
better control. 51 
There is evidence that Agasu, the leopard totem of the royal family, ex­
isted on the Abomey plateau prior to the arrival of the Alladahonu. A cult 
dedicated to kpo, the leopard, was associated with the Gedevi. the people 
acknowledged to have lived there before the AlIadahonu arrived and who 
were sometimes also called ainon, owners of the earth. The chief priest 
for Agasu. the agasunon, was always a member of the lineage descended 
from Dakodonu, and Dakodonu is said in nomoyal traditions to have 
been a Gedevi. The agasunon enjoyed ritual precedence over the kings of 
Dahomey, having the right to use royal prerogatives such as sandals. Be­
cause he was senior to the king, the king himself was required to prostrate 
before the agasunon. Most importantly. the agasunon was involved in in­
stallation ceremonies for the kings. who ritually "purchased" the country 
from him. All this suggests that during the reign of Agaja, the Alladahonu 
legitimized their hegemony by making an accommodation that acknowl­
edged the owners of the earth-the lineage of Dakodonu-and linked 
the royal lineage to a common West African symbol of royalty-the 
leopard.52

--- Page 92 ---
From Dahomey's Origins to 1 740 
75 
The myth of origin provided royal blood for the Alladahonu through 
a maternal link, the princess Aligbonon. It also tied each successive king 
to Aligbonon's son, Agasu, and hence to the supernatural strength of the 
leopard. The mythic founders of the dynasty, then, were a dyad-mother 
and son. The creation of the office of kpojito enshrined that dyad. recre¡ 
ating it with each generation as each king named one of his predecessor's 
wives to the position of "the one who whelped the leopard." Yet we 
have seen that Agasu, the leopard, is himself linked to the "owners of 
the earth," and to the lineage of Dakodonu. Aligbonon similarly was 
linked to the Abomey plateau in the pre¡Alladahonu period. Her priest, 
Adonon, was a key to the integration of Dakodonu into the royal lineage, 
because she also tied Dakodonu to Wegbaja. Some traditions maintain 
that Adonon was a Gedevi, bethrothed to Dakodonu, who was then im¡ 
pregnated by Wegbaja. By patrilineal law, her child would have been 
considered to be the child of Dakodonu. Royal family myths claim that 
Dakodonu was a member of the Alladahonu lineage; nomoyal myths say 
that Wegbaja was the adopted son ofDakodonu. ln either case, Wegbaja's 
act would have been incestuous, and Dakodonu is said to have disin¡ 
herited Wegbaja as a result. The two were reconciled only after Wegbaja 
killed an enemy of Dakodonu's. However, Adonon's position as kpojito 
makes immaterial the question of whether or oot Dakodonu and Wegbaja 
were members of the same patrilineage. As kpojito, she was the symbolic 
progenitor of the Alladahonu. Dakodonu thus became father of the 
AIladahonu dynasty, and Adonon, through marriage and incest, linked 
the AIladahonu to the previous owners of the land. Wife to one king, 
Adonon was simultaneously mother to another dynasty, which by patri¡ 
lineal code was descended from her husband. Dakodonu. 51 
The myths, speaking through the idiom of kinship and marriage, le­
gitimized the AUadahoou as rulers over their subjects on the Abomey 
plateau. But they may represent more than just a ritual justification of 
power relationships. They also hint of power sharing between the royal 
lineage and the people that they found on the Abomey plateau. Adonon. 
though priestess to a royal vodun, was herself a commoner. Each of her 
successors as kpojito was a commoner. The mother¡son dyad then, sym­
bolically joined royal and commoner and suggested that Dahomey was a

--- Page 93 ---
76 
From Dahomey's Origins to 1 740 
kingdom based on a union of royal and commoner. Moreover. that 
union of royal and commoner was made real in the eighteenth century 
as the kings built a monarchy that included persons from commoner 
roots, to the virtual exc1usion of members of the royal family. The union 
also symbolized the access of commoners to the wealth and power of the 
monarchy. 
Adonon well illustrates the point. Descendants of Adonon say that she 
was a rich and influential woman-in a culture where wealth and power 
were closely related. They say, for example, that Adonon convinced Agaja 
to wage a war of revenge on Weme Jigbe. a town where a son of hers had 
previously been captured and killed. Her wealth is suggested by the four 
families in the area of Abomey today that trace their ancestry to her. a 
sign that she controlled large numbers of people. Moreover, there are still 
farms in and around Abomey that are managed in her name and from 
which the current Adonon, who inherited the estate through positional 
succession, derives income. Estates of well-to-do persons were a legacy 
that contributed greatly to the well-being oflineages. and, at least by the 
nineteenth century, lineages began offering promising daughters to the 
king in the hope that they would do well in the palace organization. 54 
The story of Adonon speaks, too, to the integration of peoples into the 
expanding kingdom of Dahomey. Adonon would have become an ahosi. 
a wife of the king, during one of the reigns prior to Agaja. She was also 
from a town that was likely conquered during those early days of the 
monarchy. The origins of many later kpojito followed the same pattern; 
they came from regions that were targets of expansion in the recent past. 
The pattern suggests two things. First. women of newly conquered areas 
were being brought into the palace organization, which is not surprising 
considering that younger captives of war were either kept as slaves or sold 
into the overseas trade. Secondly, and a factor that had great importance 
later in the eighteenth century, opportunities were being granted to those 
newly conquered women to become part of the monarchy-to join that 
small group of persons closest to the king who wielded a certain amount 
of power in his name. 
The office of kpojito raises another question. The kpojito was the "one 
who whelped the leopard." Adonon. as kpojito, was in a sense Aligbonon,

--- Page 94 ---
4. The Kpojito Adonon, wilh attendant, in 1972. Author's field photo shows a descendant 
of Dahomey's first kpojito, Adonon (1716-1740), the reign-mate of King Agaja. Successive 
generations hold the title in perpetuity

--- Page 95 ---
78 
From Dahomey's Origins to 1 740 
the mother of the leopard, and Agaja similarly was Agasu, the leopard. 
But was she also, as the translations into European languages imply, the 
biological mother of Agaja? Twentieth-century oral accounts seem to 
suggest this was so, because they link her as "mother" also to the twin 
siblings of Agaja, Akaba and Hangbe. The reason is that Agaja was named 
Dosu, which is a name given to the child born to a woman after she gives 
birth to twins. When other kpojito and their replacements by positional 
succession appeared at court in later times, travelers without exception 
were told by Dahomeans that they were the mothers of the kings. But it 
is not clear that biological motherhood was being described. 
The word kpojiro was not recorded until after the fal of the kingdom. 
fu a term, it does not imply biological motherhood, and many of the 
European visitors differentiate between a "real" mother and an office 
holder. Dalzel explained that "besides the King's real mother, there is 
always a nominal one, who holds this title, as a mark of honour and rank 
among the women." Burton, who knew the kpojito of Glele, passed along 
gossip about the identity of the king's biological mother: "The pure 
reddish-brown of his [Gle1e's I skin, . . .  several shades lighter than the 
lightest to be seen at his Court, confirms the general report that his 
mother is a slave-girl from the northern Makhi: others whisper that she 
is a mulatto, from the French factory, Whydah." At the end of the nine­
teenth century, members of a French mission to the court of Dahomey 
similarly spoke of the "false mother of the prince," while a French re­
searcher in the twentieth century was told that the biological mother of 
the king, even if she were alive, would be replaced by the kpojito. 
Herskovits similarly learned in 1931 that "the King's official mother 
was . . .  a woman chosen for this role." 5, 
The problem of the kpojito is in part a semantic one. Kinship was 
cJassificatory in Dahomey, so that children in polygynous households 
recognized as mother not just the woman who gave birth to them but 
each of her co-wives. The kingship in principle passed from father to son 
(though in fact also from brother to brother). By definition, every wife 
of a king's father was his mother, so from a Dahomean perspective, the 
question of whether or not the kpojito, the "mother" of the king, gave 
birth to the man who reigned was irrelevant.

--- Page 96 ---
From Dahomey's Origins to 1 740 
79 
An office known as "mother of the king" or "queen mother" was not 
unique to Dahomey. To create the kpojito. the Dahomeans could have 
drawn on models from their coastal neighbors to the south, the Akan 
areas to the west. Yoruba-speaking groups to the east, or Edo-speaking 
peoples of the empire of Benin even further east. In short, a high female 
office was typical of kingdoms across a broad stretch of coastal West Af­
rica. The particular form that the office ofkpojito took. however. differed 
from neighboring models and may have been consciously manipulated 
by the Dahomeans to serve their own needs. The presence of a "mother 
of the king" is mentioned by visitors to Whydah and 1akin in the early 
eighteenth century. A plan of the Savi palace of King Houffon ofWhydah 
drawn in the 1720S shows a central entrance room to the interior court­
yard flanked by rooms of comparable size dedicated respectively to the 
king and to the "Mother of the King." Having slaves and revenues of her 
own. this woman, who was required to remain celibate. was said to re­
ceive many gifts from people who had need of her protection. Among 
the Akan, the queen mother, or asantehema. was a matrilineal relative of 
the king, or asantehene: a biological sister, mother, or sister's daughter. 
Like the "Mother of the King" at Whydah and the kpojito of Dahomey, 
she had a separate court. The asantehema had the authority to act as a 
kind of check on male power, interfering in judicial proceedings, giving 
pardons, or mitigating sentences imposed by the asantehene, and even 
advising or admonishing him and his courtiers. Influential in naming 
new chiefs, she nominated candidates for asantehene and played a central 
role in their enstoolments.56 
Kingdoms to the east had a different model for the senior female 
position-a woman not of the king's lineage. There, the woman who 
birthed the king was acknowledged to have been the mother; but a bio­
logical mother created a ritual problem, particularly in kingdoms like 
Oyo and Benin. where the male ruler was believed to be divine. The king 
could not prostrate before any person, yet a child was always required to 
subordinate himself before his mother. What would happen if a divine 
king, who ranked higher than any other mortal in his realm, met his 
mother? In Benin, the oba. once enthroned. could never again se his 
mother. She remained in a palace outside the capital city with a court and

--- Page 97 ---
BO 
From Dahomey's Origins to ' 740 
courtiers, from where she was said to have had some influence on the 
politics of the kingdom. In Oyo, there was an important woman's office 
called the iya oba, which means literally the mother ( iya) of the king 
(oba). In earlier times, the iya oba was indeed the biological mother of 
the alafin, or king, and in at least two instances, mothers reigned as re­
gents for sons who succeeded as minors. At a later point, however, the 
biological mother was required to die when her son was installed, and 
thenceforth the iya oba was appointed from among paJace women. ¯7 
As we have seen in the case of the agasunon, the problem of ritual 
ranking existed in Dahomey, too. There, it would have involved at least 
three persons, each of whom was senior to the monarch. They were the 
agasunon, the biological mother of the king, and-in the nineteenth 
century-the diviner of Fa who told the king his destiny. I have found 
no eyewitness accounts of the king prostrating to anyone in public; nev­
ertheless, Dahomeans readily described what was supposed to have hap­
pened when they met, or at least when the king met the agasunon: 
"When the Agasunno appears in person before the monarch the latter 
must remove his sandals, prostrate himself before the church, kiss the 
ground, and throw a little dust upon his forehead, whilst all the courtiers 
take a sand bath, and white men stand up and bow." Interestingly, in the 
case of the "mother of the king," we have an eyewitness account of a 
meeting betwen the king and the kpojito, and it suggests that the prob­
lem of ritual ranking did not exist between them. The English traveler 
John Duncan in 1845 saw the reigning kpojito, the aged Agontime, pros­
trate before the reigning monarch, Gezo.58 That elderly woman kneeling 
with forehead lowered to the earth is wordless evidence, and perhaps the 
strongest proof, that the holder of the office of kpojito was not normally 
the biological mother of the king. Yet descendants of the very next king, 
Glele, today insist that Glele's kpojito was in fact the biologicaJ mother of 
that king. The story of this exception that proves the rule will be told in 
chapter 6 ......

--- Page 98 ---
,">' 
3 
The Age of Tegbesu and Hwanji/e 
Si men egbe don (a woman will not go to war for nothing). 
J. A. Skertchly, transcription of a praise-name for Tegbesu 
Succession: The Palace, the Monarchy, and the Struggle for Power ,.::",.> 
King Agaja died in early 1740. The succession was disputed, as it had been 
when Agaja came to power more than twenty years earlier. and as it 
would be at the death of every subsequent Dahomean king. Succession 
struggles were crucial moments in Dahomean history, when the monar­
chy was recreated. not just with a new king but with the appointment of 
numerous new officers. male and female. A new king was formally and 
finally enthroned only on the occasion of Grand Customs. which took 
place more than a year after the death of the king's predecessor and con­
stituted his final funeral. During the interregnum, the would-be king 
and his supporters worked to consolidate control. to defeat and eliminate 
competing claims to the throne. and to demonstrate that the monarchy 
could command visible and supernatural sources of power. In effect. au­
thority followed the demonstration of power. It did not precede it. Dis­
puted successions. then, may be seen not as a violation of order. but 
rather as part of the process for recreating authority at the state's center. 
The enthronement or enstoolment of a new king was an acknowledg­
ment of the material and supernatural control that a prince and his en­
tourage could demonstrate, rather than a recognition of a prince's right 
to rule. Tegbesu was a case in point. I 
A series of oral traditions justify Tegbesu's accession. The scene of the 
first tradition is an invasion of Dahomey by Oyo. Agaja and his court flee 
west with the Dahomean army; the enemy is close behind. The Daho­
means reach the banks of the Mono River, but are unable to cross the 
flooded waterway. Desperate, they confer about what to do. The gau (war 
8 1

--- Page 99 ---
81 
The Age of Tegbesu and HwanJlfe 
chief) suggests that they fight to the end; when defeat is at hand, they will 
regroup near their stores of gunpowder and blow themselves up. The 
assembled chiefs and ministers concur. Then the five sons of Agaja are 
asked their opinion. Four agree with the suicide plan. The fifth and 
youngest is Avissou. who will later become Tegbesu. He suggests that they 
walk upstream in chest-deep water to a thick copse where they can easily 
hide. The plan works. The Oyo army arrives, sees footprints on the river­
bank, and assumes that the Dahomeans have chosen to drown rather 
than fight.' 
More frequently related are versions of a story of a sojourn of Teg­
besu in Oyo. Dahomey negotiates a settlement with Oyo, agreeing to 
pay an annual tribute: forty-one young men (forty-one meaning "a full 
amount"); forty-one young women; forty-one guns, and so on-barrels 
of powder, bales of doth, baskets of coral, and various domestic animals. 
AB a guarantee and sign of good faith, a son of Agaja is demanded. Only 
Hwanjile, the mother of Tegbesu, wil allow her son to be sent as a hos­
tage to the enemy capital. There, he again demonstrates his unusual 
powers, but this time with the help ofHwanjile. Supplying her son with a 
red doth and a protective charm, Hwanjile makes it possible for Tegbesu 
to refuse to speak, to eat, to wash, or to work in the fields, yet to remain 
dean and healthy. Tegbesu's obvious supernatural protection brings him 
to the attention of the king of Oyo. who sends him home. The young 
man returns with a variety of innovations: Oyo-style dothing, umbrellas, 
and the gods Heviosso and Sakpata.' 
Having been twice a savior of Dahomey, Tegbesu is told by Agaja that 
he is the one Agaja wishes to succeed him. However. another brother is 
vidaho, the designated heir. Upon Agaja's death, Tegbesu's brothers plot 
to kill him. Tegbesu is helped by Landiga, a man he later names migan 
(prime minister). Needing to reach the central palace in order to be 
named king, Tegbesu is trapped in his own residence, his enemies block­
ing the door. Landiga then taps on a wall with his left hand, and another 
way out opens. Tegbesu reaches the palace and is made king whil e  his 
enemies wait at his door. But opposition does not end with Tegbesu's 
arrival at the palace. As part of the enstoolment ceremonies, the king 
must wear a certain tunic; laced with thorns and stinging medicines by 
his brothers, this garment is placed over Tegbesu's shoulders. The king

--- Page 100 ---
The Age of Tegbesu and Hwanjile 
83 
endures and pronounces a strong name for himself in recognition: the 
buffalo who is dressed is impossible to undress.¤ 
A final story about opposition to Tegbesu centers on another of Agaja's 
wives, not Hwan;ile-this one is in charge ofthe storehouses of the treas¥ 
ures of the king. Prior to the death of Agaja, she sends a gift of very fine 
coral to Oyo with a request for intervention at the time of the succession. 
She promises that, should her son Agidisu become king, Oyo wil always 
receive the finest coral from Dahomey. Agaja learns of her deception and 
imprisons her. Agidisu then moves to Allada, where he receives the sup­
port of several chiefs. Once enthroned at Abomey, Tegbesu defeats Agi­
disu. Vowing never again to permit a woman who has given birth to a 
son to be guardian of the royal treasure, Tegbesu entrusts the storehouse 
key to a male officer who lives in the household of the meu.5 
What are we to make of these stories of the rise of Tegbesu to power? 
They are dearly self-serving, designed to celebrate the virtues and super¦ 
natural abilities of Tegbesu and those who surrounded him. They pur­
port to demonstrate the clarity of the king's vision. how he alone could 
outwit Oyo when everyone else had given up, how he could live as a 
hostage among his enemies yet neither work for nor be dependent upon 
them, and how he could overcome the dangerous medicines of his evil 
brothers. They show that Tegbesu's own abilities were enhanced by allies 
endowed with supernatural powers. Though suffused with mythic ele­
ments, these tales of power and magic nevertheless are placed in histori­
cally plausible settings. Oyo invaded Dahomey in 1726, 1728, and 1729, 
and was involved in indecisive warfare with Dahomey in 1730-32. The 
Dahomeans typically abandoned Abomey with the arrival of the Oyo 
cavalry, fleeing south or west, and, at least in 1729. they fled across a river. 
Tribute was negotiated and paid in 1727, and a major settlement, that 
could well have included the handing over of a Dahomean prince as hos­
tage, was made in 1730. Judging from the appearance of Oyo cultural and 
court influences during the mid-eighteenth century, it is very possible 
that Tegbesu spent time there as a young man.6 
The oral traditions' evidence of a major succession struggle, or more 
accurately a series of struggles, is corroborated by contemporary Euro­
pean sources. Three names are mentioned as princes who opposed Teg­
besu: Agidisu. Zingah, and Tokpa. Zingah was possibly a son of Agaja

--- Page 101 ---
84 
The Age of Tegbesu and Hwanjffe 
who had earlier defected with four thousand men from the Dahomean 
army during a campaign against the Mahi. He may also have been the 
same person called Agidisu by the oral tradition. Robin Law, referring to 
Agidisu's being based in Allada and Tegbesu's being in Abomey, hypothe­
sizes that in effect the two cities represented competing power centers. In 
any event, Agidisu, Zingah, or Agidisu/Zingah were defeated militarily. 
Zingah's punishment was recorded by Norris. Because Alladahonu blood 
could not be spilled, Zingah was sewn into a hammock, carried to Why­
dah, and thrown into the sea. Tokpa's opposition to Tegbesu is less clear, 
but it resulted in his name being cursed. Like everyone else in Dahomey, 
a prince received his name from an ancestor, a jota, whose reincarnation 
in the infant was learned through divination. Following Tegbesu's curse, 
no prince whose joto was Tokpa could ever be permitted to reign. Norris 
describes what may have been a final show of opposition to Tegbesu's 
accession, a rebellion led by the meu, the king's second minister, some 
time after Zingah's challenge. The meu's army was defeated by a force 
under the gau, the war commander.7 The role ofOyo in all of these battles 
is unclear. Law is willing to accept the possibility that Oyo supported 
Agidisu against Tegbesu, and that Tegbesu's accession thus signaled Da­
homean hostility toward a powerful neighbor. Arguing the opposite 
position from essentially the same evidence, Pogla Glete suggests that the 
story of Agidisu's mother masks the reality that Tegbesu himself was im­
posed on Dahomey by Oyo. Tegbesu was chosen because, having spent 
some of his youth in Oyo, he would be more receptive to Oyo influence.8 
How, in fact, was Tegbesu chosen to be king? Visitors to Dahomey, 
like twentieth-century historians, looking for principles of orderly selec­
tion, arrange evidence about successions into a series of rules for an 
undisputed transfer of power. First, they claim that the king had to be the 
oldest son of the previous king, and some insist that the throne was in­
herited through primogeniture. Virtually all then add a caveat: that the 
oldest son was chosen only if he was judged capable of ruling. Archibald 
Dalzel, for example, says "the King's eldest son is the heir apparent; 
though, for reasons of state, the Ministers, after the King's death, may 
alter the order of succession." Writing at the turn of the nineteenth cen­
tury, John M'Leod similarly points to an eldest son, but of a favorite wife,

--- Page 102 ---
The Age of Tegbesu and Hwanjile 
85 
"provided there exists no particular reason for setting him aside." There 
is a certain vagueness about what qualities might make an elder son in­
eligible. Examples tend to focus on ritual handicaps-that the son had a 
minor physical deformity or that he had received the name of an ancestor 
who had been cursed, such as Tokpa.9 
The use of the term "oldest son" is a semantic problem comparable 
to that of the use of the terms "oldest daughter" or "mother of the 
king." When heirs were named, they received the title vidaho (vi = child; 
daho = great, important), a term that was probably translated by Daho­
means into European languages as "oldest son." According to Dahomean 
social principles, the firstborn always outranked all other members of any 
family; in that sense, the elder always in principle had to be the lineage 
head, and a firstborn prince would be king. Yet Dahomeans reserved the 
right to allow someone else, someone also of an appropriately mature age 
but not necessarily the fustborn. to be head of a lineage, or to be king. In 
short, a prince who was recognized as ruler was by definition, but not 
necessarily by years. the oldest. He would be called "oldest son" even if 
he had brothers born before him.lo 
During the nineteenth century, heirs would be named and publicly 
acknowledged. However. in the eighteenth the expected lines of succes­
sion were far less clear. Writing about Dahomey at the time of Tegbesu's 
death, Chenevert and Bulet claim that "all the children of the king are 
reared during early childhood in the harem. The women who have the 
right to give heirs to the throne compete to have their children adopted. 
An appanage [grant of land and income 1 is given to the child that the 
king selects; he and al his brothers remain far from the court. And those 
who are responsible for taking care of him guard the secret at the risk of 
their heads." 11 
European visitors consistently claim there was a second rule leading to 
orderly succession: that the person named king had to be a son born 
either after his father had been named heir apparent or after he had been 
enthroned. Certainly, the length of the reigns of most Dabomean kings 
would have allowed sons born after their investiture to have reached 
adulthood before their fathers' deaths. Of the eight kings whose reign 
dates are known, five reigned for more than twenty years. Of the other

--- Page 103 ---
86 
The Age of Tegbesu and Hwan/lle 
three, Kpengla ruled for fifteen, Agonglo had his reign cut short at nine 
years by assassination, and Behanzin was deposed by the French after 
four. Despite the short length of Agonglo's reign, his son Adandozan may 
well have been born after his father was confirmed king in 1]89. Although 
Adandozan ceased being ruler in 1818 (regents apparently ruling for him 
until 1804), the king lived into the 1860s. Even Akaba, whose exact reign 
dates are not known, appears to fit the pattern. According to tradition, 
Akaba was of an advanced age when he reached the throne- old enough 
to have fathered children who were already adults or near-adults. Yet at 
his death, there was no potential heir old enough to be named king, 
apparently because his reign was too short for a child to grow to matur­
ity. At least four Dahomean kings were said to have been brothers of 
their predecessors: Agaja, Kpengla, Gezo, and Agoliagbo (the latter being 
named after Behanzin was deposed). Nevertheless, all could have been 
born according to the norm; that is, after their father was recognized as 
heir or king.12 
Writers about Dahomey also suggest that the number of wives whose 
sons were seen as potential kings was relatively small. An observer near 
the end of Tegbesu's reign, for example, says that the heir had to come 
from among the sons born to his "six great wives, who alone can give 
rulers to the kingdom." le Herisse, whose information was based on 
nineteenth-century practices, says that the vidaho was given ten to twenty 
women with whom he was supposed to create his potential successors. 13 
Such a norm would explain why the oral traditions about Tegbesu imply 
that Agaja had only five sons. We have no demographic information for 
the royal family in this period, but it would be hard to believe that Agaja, 
who was in power for at least twenty-two years and had sexual access to 
hundreds of women, would have fathered so few male children. What is 
likely, then, is that there was a grouping of sons, born to a select group 
of women, who were seen as potential heirs to the throne. However, 
we have no way of knowing with certainty if the Dahomean kings who 
actually ruled came from that select group. 
To sum up. normative thinking on Dahomey insists on the rights of 
the first son born after his father's succession or acknowledgment as heir. 
A closer look at the eighteenth-century evidence. however, makes clear

--- Page 104 ---
The Age of Tegbesu and HwanJile 
B 7 
that an acceptable king could be one of several princes. How, then, was 
it decided which of the several potential heirs would become king? Was 
there in fact an individual or a body with the authority to name a king? 
One striking feature of the eighteenth-century descriptions of the 
selection of the king is that there is no consensus on precisely who had 
the authority to choose a new king. One source speaks of a "Council of 
Ministers" that gave the nod to Tegbesu. Another claims that even if there 
were an heir apparent, at the death of a king the migan and meu had the 
right to select the new monarch. 14 Other observers of eighteenth-century 
court life argue that the choice of heir was the king's decision. Once the 
king was dead, however, the women within the palace were key players: 
"Often [the death of the king] is kept secret from the public for some 
time by the women who during this sort of interregnum sometimes make 
changes in the last wishes of the dead king. The women are the trustees 
of his last intentions and have the right to proclaim the new king. It thus 
can happen that the one who was chosen by the king loses the profits 
because the mother of his brothers has plotted and formed a party. From 
that arise divisions and civil wars." 15 The lack of a recognized body of 
authorized kingmakers tends to confirm that it was not so much that the 
king was chosen, but that a prince and his supporters effectively took 
control and then were acknowledged. Contemporary sources make clear 
that control over the palace was a key to control over the kingdom. Writ­
ing about Wbydah, for example, WiUiam 80sman says, "[F]or the eldest 
Son no sooner hears of the King's Death, than he immediately makes his 
interest amongst his Friends, to take Possession of the late King's Court 
and Wives; and succeeding happily in these Particulars, he need not 
doubt the remainder; for the Commonalty wil not easily consent that 
after that he shall be driven from the Throne." The pattern was the same 
in Dahomey. The oral traditions about Tegbesu say that he hurried with 
Migan Landiga to the palace when he heard of his father's death. Kpengla 
and Adandozan are similarly associated with haste to reach the palace at 
the time of their predecessors' deaths. At the end of the nineteenth cen­
tury, an ally present when Glele died sent word to Behanzin to come to 
the palace and, while awaiting his arrival, beheaded a servant girl at the 
scene to keep the news from being spread to others.16

--- Page 105 ---
BB 
The Age of Tegbesu and HwanJlle 
The rush to the palace brings up another important point raised by 
the oral traditions about Tegbesu: that a prince made a bid for power in 
conjunction with other powerful persons, including women within the 
palace. A would-be king arrived at the palace with allies, normally armed 
retainers, and he typically was assisted by women on the inside. Speak­
ing symbolically, the oral traditions name two individuals who helped 
Tegbesu: Landiga, whose left hand-the hand associated with ritual 
power-opened an escape hole in a wall, and Hwanjile, whose magical 
skills helped Tegbesu overcome danger and opposition. They also speak 
of a rival male-female alliance-the one that included Agidisu and the 
unnamed female keeper of the king's treasury. 
There were a number of ways that women within the palace could aid 
or oppose a would-be king. First, attempts were made to keep the death 
of the king secret until his successor had taken control of the palace. But 
princes did not reside in the palace, and a prince who wished to be king 
needed contacts there to let him know that the king had died and hence 
that he should make his move. Eighteenth-century sources claim that the 
king's sons were kept away from court and were deliberately excluded 
from participation in politics. Pommegorge writes that "these young 
princes are absolutely nothing in the country of their father, which they 
see rarely. They are given no rank as long as the king lives. They are 
carefully kept away from knowledge of the affairs of the country; and they 
are kept in poverty, so that they are not able to form any party.» Accounts 
scattered through the history of the kingdoms of Dahomey, Whydah, and 
Porta Novo insist that princes were brought up in humble circumstances 
in the households of commoners and that they were unaware of their 
status. King Houffon of Whydah, for example, was said to have been 
guarding the pigs of his foster family when courtiers arrived to make 
him king. As late as the accession of Gezo (1818), traditions insist that the 
king had been a simple farmer called from his fields to serve his people 
as king.17 
These accounts of the lowly state of future kings were part of the 
mythic aura of kingship-that a ruler learned to understand his people, 
and to make friends with commoners who would later serve him as offi-

--- Page 106 ---
The Age of Tegbesu and HwanJile 
89 
cials, by living among his people and sharing their experiences. Despite 
this ideological vision of king as everyman, it is obvious that Dahomean 
princes were aware of their status. We know, for example, that certain 
sons of Aga;a and Tegbesu were provided with estates for their support. 
We know that as early as the reign of Agonglo, the sons with potential 
claims to the throne were educated in the household of the meu. Never­
theless, eighteenth-century princes do not appear to have been included 
in deliberations at court and they were not treated as high-ranking per­
sons. Pommegorge describes a meal hosted by the king and eaten with a 
minister of state. The king's sons sat on the ground at the foot of the table, 
eating morsels that the guests tossed from their plates. A modest status, 
however, would not have precluded ambitious princes from preparing 
their bids for the kingship. For success, they would have needed strong 
allies, both inside and outside the palace. 18 
Beyond providing crucial intelligence, most importantly the news of 
the death of the king, women in the palace might have been able to 
muster armed female guards to take physical control. Female contacts 
within the palace might even have been able to hurry the demise of the 
reigning monarch. But tales of assassination move us ahead of our story 
and need to wait until ·the reign of Agong1o. Details of precisely what 
happened at the time of successions are still few at the accession of Teg­
besu. They do suggest. however. that coaHtions of persons made bids to 
control the monarchy. And they are the first records that directly impli­
cate palace women in attempts to place specific individuals on the throne. 
Who were the women who worked with princes to win control over 
the monarchy? Two-Hwan;ile. and the mother of Agidisu-are noted 
by name at the accession of Tegbesu. Hwanjile was a foreigner to Daho­
mey. an Aja woman who was probably brought into the palace as a cap­
tive of war. We do not know precisely what position she held in the palace 
of Tegbesu's predecessor. Agaja. Traditions tell us two important details 
about the mother of Agidisu: that she was keeper of the royal treasury 
and that she wanted the kingship for her biological son. The first detail 
indicates that she ranked high within the palace; in common households. 
for example. it was always the head, or first, wife who controlled access

--- Page 107 ---
90 
The Age of Tegbesu and Hwanjile 
to the storehouses. Traditions say that Tegbesu afterward vowed never to 
trust a woman who had given birth to a son, thus setting out an ideo­
logical position that appears to have been followed as policy, at least in 
the nineteenth century. During that period, we have a handful of cases 
where we know personal data about women within the palace. Those 
women in the highest offices and closest to the king did not have living 
male children.l-i In the eighteenth century, unfortunately, a dearth of cor­
roborating evidence leaves us unable to evaluate fuly the tradition of the 
mother of Agidisu. Indeed, it is not even clear if the story of the mother 
of Agidisu is based on a historic incident or if it is perhaps a formulaic 
statement about women's character, a myth like that of Na Geze, that 
expresses a later perspective on the relationship of princes to their bio­
logical mothers. 
Despite the difficulties of distinguishing what can be taken literally, 
what emerges from these records is a pattern that would continue until 
the abolition of the kingdom by the French: powerful women within the 
palace would ally themselves with ambitious princes to build coalitions 
aimed at taking over the throne. No king was confirmed in office without 
being challenged. Oral traditions often retrospectively "legitimize" the 
struggle for control by claiming, as they do in the case of Tegbesu, that 
the preceding king had preferred the winner as his successor.20 But some­
thing more seems to be operating in these accounts, something that is 
different from the distortion of history to conceal a usurping king. Da­
homeans do not seem to have considered bids for control by factions 
other than those of a designated heir to be illegitimate. For example, the 
oral accounts of the accessions of the nineteenth-century kings Glele and 
Behanzin, both of whom were official heirs challenged by their brothers, 
do not emphasize the legitimacy of their own claims to the throne; nor 
do they condemn their opponents as illegitimate. Rather. like the tradi­
tions surrounding Tegbesu, they stress the abilities of the victors to over­
come their enemies. In short. they point to a demonstration of power 
as a fundamental legitimizing act. They hint that a king was not named 
to power, but rather that he used power to demonstrate his legitimacy, 
proving himself the most capable heir in the line of the Alladahonu. The 
initial hurdle for a new king and his allies. then. was demonstrating an

--- Page 108 ---
The Age of Tegbesu and Hwanjile 
91 
ability to use power by gaining control of the center of the kingdom­
the palace. A second question, the legitimacy of the dynasty itself, con­
tinued to be disputed in the early days ofTegbesu's reign. 
The Kpojito Hwanjile  
Hwanjile was from Aja country to the west of Abomey. Traditions vary 
about the means by which she entered the palace of Abomey. Some say 
that she was a war captive; others assert that she was a trader who met 
a wife of Agaja (or met Agaja himself) in a market and that she was 
recruited to the palace because of her beauty. Some traditions justify and 
legitimize her position by claiming that she was a good friend of Adonon, 
the kpojito of Agaja, and that Adonon was responsible for marrying her 
to Agaja. Other factors in Hwanjile's past are perhaps mOTe revealing: that 
she had already had two children before she arrived in the palace of Agaja 
and that she was knowledgable about various vodun. In his treatment of 
Dahomean religion, Bernard Maupoil comments that Hwanjile was "a 
powerful woman, expert in making charms and a great psychologist."21 
Fully adult and a priest when she became an ahosi (king's wife), Hwanjile 
made good use of her experience, skills, and knowledge. Oral traditions, 
as noted above, represent the young Tegbesu as a protege of Hwanjile. 
She became kpojito on the installation of the king and, "strong as a 
man," she then worked to stabilize the monarchy.22 We know that the 
first Hwanjile died before the end of Tegbesu's reign, though Hwanjile, 
in the form of replacements through positional succession, played a cen­
tral role in a later succession struggle and she today continues to be an 
important authority in the life of the area that once was the kingdom of 
Dahomey. On a chance visit to her compound in the early 1970S, I found 
her presiding over a family council of individuals resident in Whydah; 
led by Tegbesu's yovogan. they had come to an audience with her in 
Abomey to settle some land and lineage problems. 
The accession of Tegbesu and his ability to take control over the 
Dahomean government confirmed his legitimacy as the heir of the AlIa­
dahonu lineage. Contemporary European sources and oral traditions, 
however, indicate that the legitimacy of the dynasty itself was still being 
disputed, despite the accommodations previously made with local "own-

--- Page 109 ---
92 
The Age o{Tegbesu and Hwanjife 
ers of the earth." There is evidence from the 1730S and 1740S of unrest in 
the territories nominally under Dahomean control. Although European 
records point to problems of trust and command at the levels of officers 
and ministers of state. oral traditions point to unrest at a popular level 
that was expressed through religious institutions. 
Followers of vodun were organized into local congregations. each of 
which was headed by a male-female pair of vodunon (non 
= owner, 
guardian. mother). The individual chapter houses in turn kept in touch 
with congregations in other localities. Because they were extrafarnilial, 
and because they linked persons across broad geographic spans, the 
vodun represented a potential political threat to the monarchy. Maupoil, 
for example. comments that "the monarchy of Abomey was aware of 
the danger that was associated with powerful congregations of priests in 
close contact with the faithful that they advised and influenced. Their 
mastery of sacred amulets reinforced this influence. which was more than 
ready to deviate to the political Jevel." Melville and Prances Herskovits 
collected oral traditions that argue specifically that religious institutions 
in the eighteenth century were perceived by the monarchy as threats to 
its authority. The Herskovitses were told that under Agaja there had been 
"many plots against the monarchy instigated by the Sagbata (Sakpata 1 
gods and by the gods of the rivers and the silk-cotton trees . . . .  So many 
of the voduno and their followers were sold into slavery." Tegbesu, upon 
achieving power, was faced with "the disaffection of the people. who 
were being swayed by the priesthoods of the autochthonous gods to resist 
the monarch."21 
Hwanjile is credited with resolving the unrest by reordering the hier­
archy of the vodun to more closely reflect the dynasty's interests and 
more effectively control the followers of the popular gods. There is evi­
dence of strong monarchical efforts to encourage and control religious 
life during this period. Different traditions credit Hwanjile specifically 
with bringing numerous vodun to Abomey.24 Oral traditions agree that 
her most important achievement was to import from Aja country a pair 
of creator vodun, Mawu and Lisa, and to set them up as supreme over 
the Fon pantheon of gods. Because Mawu and Lisa ranked highest in the 
hierarchy of the vodun, all other gods were subordinate to them, and

--- Page 110 ---
The Age oj Tegbesu and HwanJlle 
93 
their priest, Hwanjile, became effective director of religious life in Da­
homey. Crucial administrative decisions about the management of all the 
vodun came under her jurisdiction: the confirmation in office of new 
vodunon, the resolution of religious disputes, the approval of dates for 
ceremonies, and the making of decisions about when and where vodun 
might be installed. In addition, there appear to have been efforts to con­
trol the activities of the vodun through making them financially depen­
dent on the monarchy. Chenevert and Bulet, writing after the end of 
Tegbesu's reign, report that priests and their chapter houses were main­
tained by the monarchy through grants of land. Moreover, the king 
covered expenses to support ceremonies that, to judge from twentieth­
century patterns, would have constituted a considerable financial sub­
sidy.1.5 In practical terms, then, by the end of Tegbesu's reign in 1774. the 
monarchy controlled the vodun and their followers through direct regu­
lation and financial support of chapter houses. 
A number of other religious innovations also date to the mid­
eighteenth century. Two of these would have important ramifications 
long after the deaths of Tegbesu and Hwanjile: the establishment of the 
cult of the tohosu, which was dedicated to vodun of the royal family, and 
the encouragement of vodun who could foretell the future. Apart from 
the kings and kpojito, the first human-born creatures to be honored as 
deities were the tohosu of the royal family. Tohosu (to = river, lake, 
marsh; hosu, or ahosu = ruler, king) were said to appear on earth as 
anomalous births, children born with missing or deformed limbs or with 
teeth, hair, or other abnormalities that were interpreted as visible signs 
of their nature. Powerful and dangerous beings, they were returned by 
the Dahomeans to the waters from which they were believed to have 
come. The active worship of tohosu was dated to the time ofTegbesu and 
was associated with Zumadunu, a tohosu fathered by Akaba said to have 
been born with six eyes and a beard, and who walked and talked at birth. 
Various legends tell of problems-drought, fire, famine-that persisted 
while the kings ignored the collective body of tohosu. The troubles ended 
only when the royal lineage agreed to worship them. Beginning with 
Akaba and Zumadunu, each king was linked to at least one major tohosu. 
The worship of the tohosu. who were ranked hierarchically under their

--- Page 111 ---
9"'/ 
The Age of Tegbesu and HwanJlfe 
firstborn, Zumadunu, was ultimately directed. by a priest named Mived.e. 
Zumadunu's temple in Abomey, and hence the headquarters for the to· 
hosu, was placed adjacent to but behind the temples of Mawu and Lisa. 
In the eighteenth century, like all other vodun. the tohosu and their 
priests were subordinate to Hwanjile's direction. Though far from central 
to religious life in Tegbesu's time, the tohosu were the harbingers of reli· 
gious changes that would begin to focus attention and religious control 
specifically on the royal lineage.l6 
The second religious innovation with long·term implications had to 
do with vodun who could foretell the future, and specifically with divi· 
nation. Spirit mediumship and various forms of divination appear to 
have existed from earlier times. They were a necessary part of faith in 
vodun, because humanity, which regularly sent prayers and sacrifices to 
the world of the shadows, needed mechanisms to receive messages and 
to interpret signs of the vodun. The system of divination known as Fa, or 
Ifa, among Yoruba·speaking peoples, was brought to the Abomey plateau 
during the reign of Agaja, though there is evidence that Fa was known 
in Allada and Whydah in earlier times. Maupoil records a legend that Fa 
was introduced by two Yoruba diviners who arrived in Abomey near the 
beginning of Agaja's reign. Tegbesu was the first king to be initiated in 
the forest of Fa and to receive his kpoli, the sacred object containing his 
sign, and the key to learning the details of his destiny. As a religious and 
conceptual system, Fa differed dramatically from the practices of vodun 
in Dahomey. It was individualistic, based on a process by which a person 
working privately through a diviner sought to understand his personal 
fate within the cosmos. And Fa and its practice were gendered male.27 
Though within a hundred years Fa would become central to divining 
in Dahomey, during the period of Tegbesu it was clearly seen as only 
one of a number of vodun that could be utilized to learn the unknown. 
Indeed., the Herskovitses suggest that Fa itself was encouraged by the 
monarchy to compete with and discredit the bokanto (bokan = amulet, 
charm; to = father), diviners associated with the indigenous people of 
the Abomey plateau. Tegbesu is said to have made war on the Baribas in 
order to capture Muslim diviners. Hwanjile, too, is credited with im· 
parting the vodun Bagbo, who reputedly could foretell the future. from

--- Page 112 ---
The Age of Tegbesu and Hwanjilc 
95 
the area ofSavalu in Mahi country. Traditions are specific on Bagbo's role 
as a competing divination system, for "two safeguards are better than 
one, and the monarchy might have an interest in setting diviners at vari­
ance with each other." We do not know specifically if spirit mediumship 
was suppressed at this time, but the Herskovitses collected a tradition that 
hints that it may have been. and it did not exist as a public phenomenon 
in later periods. Describing efforts to reduce the influence of the bokanto. 
people told Herskovits. "In early times, when the gods came into the 
heads of vodunon. and even vodunsi, they would prophesy. But the kings 
did not want this. A man or a woman in any vilage in Dahomey might 
then rule in the name of a god." 28 
The worship of vodun associated with the royal family and the practice 
of Fa divination would dramatically alter the monarchy in the nineteenth 
century. For the moment, however, it was Mawu and Lisa who embodied 
and symbolized the political control over religious life that the Daho­
mean monarchy achieved during the period of Tegbesu. The two deities 
reinforced and elaborated an ideological vision of power relationships at 
the center of the state of Dahomey. Mawu (female) and Lisa (male) were 
gendered deities associated with acts of creation, but they do not appear 
otherwise to have been linked as husband and wife. Though brought 
from an area west of Dahomey, Mawu and Lisa were originally linked to 
Yoruba-speaking cultures to the east. In Yoruba thought, Mawu (Yeye 
Mowo) was wife of the creator god Obatala; Usa (Oshala), in his Yoruba 
incarnation, had been the deity that molds human beings out of clay. 
The Herskovitses found Mawu and Lisa described variously as twins or 
as an androgynous mother and son. In either case, they were a pair with 
contrasting attributes: female/male. moon/sun, night/day, coolness/heat, 
older/younger, west/east. The joining ofMawu and Usa was reminiscent 
of the ideological message established in the previous reign through the 
pairing of Aligbonon with Agasu and Kpojito Adonon with King Agaja: 
that power and authority derive from a male-female pair with contrasting 
attributes. It is significant that in neither case was the pair a husband 
and wife, a relationship in which the female was considered to be de­
pendent and subordinate. Moreover, Aligbonon/Agasu, Adonon/Agaja, 
and Hwanjile/Tegbesu paired individuals from royal and commoner

--- Page 113 ---
96 
The Age of Tegbesu and Hwanjile 
lineages. Though royalty had initially resided in the female, Aligbonon, 
and the Alladahonu traced their royal blood matrilineally to her, with the 
creation of the kpojito and king dyad, royalty was derived from the male, 
following patrilineal succession. Drawing on the ideological images at the 
end of the nineteenth century, Maurice Glele argues that the king and 
kpojito formed the central ideological unity-man and woman, royal 
and commoner-upon which the state was based. GleJe could be speak­
ing directly to the challenges of the reign ofTegbesu and to the solutions 
found by Hwanjile when he asserts: "Thus an equilibrium, a counter­
weight, was established and continually strived for at the very heart of 
the monarchy's conception of power. The power of the king was limited 
in its very essence, on the one hand, by other princes who could on the 
basis of their origin claim the throne. It was limited on the other hand, 
at the level of the people, by the commoners from whom his mother had 
come and whom he could neither deny nor forget."29 
Ministers, Traders, and the Monarchy .-c::".> 
The ideological vision of balanced power centers that is expressed by 
Maurice GleJe was a reality of the monarchy in the second half of the 
eighteenth century. It was perhaps most vividily illustrated by the pairing 
of Tegbesu and Hwanjile, who appear to have been perceived as coeulers. 
But it was reflected, too, in more than the two power centers that they 
represented, because the proliferation of state offices was beginning to 
create pockets of power and wealth among the commoners who were 
being drawn into the kingdom's government. By the 1750S, we can see the 
dynamics of inside-outside tensions that contrasted the palace and its 
focus on the interests of the royal lineage, on the one hand, with the 
outside and its focus on the interests of common lineages, on the other. 
Yet the tensions were far more complex than the binary model implied 
by inside/outside or royallcommoner. Because of the centrality of the 
lineage in social life, individuals involved in the state always had divided 
loyalties. Faithful service to the king offered rich rewards, but one's ma­
terial and spiritual past and future were tied up with the lineage. The tug 
of those loyalties can be imagined most easily for women within the pal­
ace, who were pledged to serve the king yet who stood to enrich them-

--- Page 114 ---
The Age of Tegbesu ancl Hwcmjile 
97 
selves and their lineages if they managed their resources and opportuni­
ties well. Officials outside the palace similarly worked simultaneously for 
the state and for their own interests. 
The concern of the dynasty for divided loyalties was reflected in rela­
tions of the kings with their courtiers. In the early days of the kingdom, 
as the Alladahonu established themselves on the Abomey plateau, they 
probably relied heavily on members of their own lineage for positions of 
greatest responsibility and only gradually began to trust people outside 
the royal lineage. The conquest of the territories of Allada and Whydah 
more than doubled the size of the kingdom and necessitated dramatic 
changes in the administration of the kingdom. Pressures were exacer­
bated by external attacks-usually alternating between the Oyo cavalry 
and the exiled leadership of Whydah-that were nearly constant from 
the 1720S until 174Ít In that year, a settlement with Oyo by which Daho­
mey agreed to pay permanent annual tribute brought relative peace to 
Dahomey, though Whydah would continue to be a problem. The struggle 
to order the vodun and their followers reflected a response to one form 
of popular opposition during these troubled decades. It was paralleled by 
strife internal to the workings of the state as the dynasty coped with how 
and to whom to entrust greater administrative power, Reports from the 
last decade of Agaja's reign suggest that the 1730S were characterized by 
tensions between the kings and their appointed officials. Law describes 
a "campaign of terror" during the first two decades of Tegbesu's reign, 
when executions of high-ranking male officials were frequent and often 
appeared to have been based on little more than vague suspicions of 
disloyalty. Nine of the ten yovogan who held office between 1743 and 
1763 were executed. Contemporary Europeans recorded tales of intrigue 
worthy of the most imaginative fiction. Norris, for example, wrote of 
Shampo, a military officer of Tegbesu's, who "was the darling of the sol­
diers, and every tongue was busy in his praise: such merit could not fail 
to excite a tyrant's jealousy. Ahadee [Tegbesul from that moment deter­
mined to cut him off. Shampo had a sister in the king's house, who, by 
some means, got intimation of the king's design: she could have no inter­
view with her brother, for the king's women are forbidden to hold dis­
course with any man; but as she was at liberty to send provisions for his

--- Page 115 ---
98 
The Age of Tegbesu and Hwanjile 
table, from the royal mansion, she concealed a knife and a cord, with a 
noose on the end of it, among the victua1s," Shampo got the point and 
fled the country, taking "a considerable part of the army" with him.3O 
By the end of Tegbesu's reign, stories of arbitrary dismissa1 and exe¦ 
cution were less frequent and the offices of state were being used to inआ 
tegrate nonrora1 men and women into the kingdom's government. In 
retrospect, Dahomeans claimed that the kings deliberately excluded per¦ 
sons who were of royal blood from the kingdom's administration, on 
grounds that royalty would have pursued their own ambitions, whereas 
commoners were grateful and faithful after being elevated to high office, II 
Service to the monarchy was handsomely rewarded, particularly at the 
highest levels, Among the men who were part of the closest circle of the 
monarchy were what I will call ministers of state. Their number varied 
over time but does not seem ever to have exceeded seven, Beyond this 
circle were dozens of high officers variously referred to as chiefs, or cabo§ 
ceers, from the Portuguese cabeceiro. or headman, In addition, titled 
women within the palace and certain of the brothers and sisters of each 
king enjoyed the kind of privileges and rewards that I describe below, 
Scholars have debated two related points-whether or not there was 
a landed or a commercial aristocracy and whether or not offices were 
hereditary. Obviously, if there had been a nobility and if offices had been 
hereditary, the power of the king and his close supporters would have 
been severely limited. I argue that, apart from the royal lineage, Dahomey 
did not have an aristocratic or noble class, though it did develop social 
cleavages based on wealth. Offices were not hereditary, which meant that 
each succession opened the way for a new set of persons to make up the 
monarchy-that cluster of persons around the king who exercised power 
with him and in his name, 
The evidence about offices and their occupants can be confusing. 
Norris, for example, is sometimes cited as evidence that offices were in¨ 
herited and that the kings were forced to deal with a hereditary noble 
class. Norris describes the revolt of the meu against Tegbesu and his death 
in battle fighting the king's forces. He then comments that "the king 
seems to have harboured no vindictive resentment against Mayhou's [the 
--meu's] family, for he soon after advanced his younger brother into his 
office." But Norris himself contradicts those who would interpret this as

--- Page 116 ---
The Age of Tegbesu and Hwanjile 
99 
being evidence of a hereditary class. He describes the major ministers of 
state, including the meu, saying "these are the principal personages of the 
kingdom; to which offices they have no hereditary claim." 32 
Le Herisse understood and described the system, though his descrip« 
tion may seem contradictory at first glance. "The duties of the grand 
chiefs or caboceers that were bestowed on Dahomeans who were not 
members of the royal family formed them into a distinguishable class in 
society, a sort of nobility. They [the duties] were not hereditary; never­
theless the title-holders transmitted the name that they had carried as 
great chiefs to the oldest of their sons. These then became zinkponon, 
owners of the stool." The distinction in essence is one between title and 
function. The title of any office, once conferred, became part of the estate 
of the titleholder and was passed down in perpetuity to his or her descen­
dants. However, the functions of given offices were not inherited, and 
each king appointed new officers with the same titles, who were generally 
not members of the lineage of the previous holders of that office and title. 
When Agaja's meu died fighting Tegbesu, for example, someone among 
his descendants needed to be confirmed to replace him as zinkponon, 
holder of the stool (or title) and director of the dead man's estate. By law, 
the entire estate of the deceased meu reverted to the king, who then could 
have returned all or only portions of the estate to the heir apparent. Un­
fortunately, Norris does not record how much of the estate was returned 
to the family in the meu's case, though he does make clear that an heir 
within the dead meu's lineage was confirmed as titleholder. Heirs were 
probably nominated by lineages, though they were subject to formal ap­
proval and appointment by the king. Meanwhile, though, Tegbesu had 
appointed a different man, Sahenni, to be meu and to perform the func­
tions of that office during his reign. Only one lineage is remembered in 
Abomey as having provided numerous ministers to the kings, that of the 
migan for Agaja. Amossuga. Two of his sons were migan and meu for 
Agonglo. Later descendants served as migan and sogan for Gezo, and 
another descendant was meu to Glele.13 
A small group of officers, the gbonugan daho (ghonu 
= outside; 
gan = chief, director; daho = great, important), held what were consid­
ered to be the central ministerial positions outside the palace. Sources 
number these offices at between five and seven, depending upon the

--- Page 117 ---
100 
The Age of Tegbesu and HwanJlfe 
period of the kingdom's history. At least three. the migan (prime min­
ister), meu (second minister), and yovogan (chief for the Europeans), 
consistently appear in lists of major officers from the 1740S to the aboli­
tion of the kingdom. Visitors during Tegbesu's reign claim that at that 
period there were five principal ministers: the migan (sometimes, in 
other sources. spelled Tamegah), meu (Maybou), yovogan (Eubigah), 
gau (Agaow), and ajaho (Tahou, or Diaou). We met the first four in the 
preceding chapter. The fifth, the ajaho. occupied a politically sensitive 
office said to have had a variety of functions: chief of the secret police, 
superintendent of the palace. and. in the nineteenth century, minister of 
religion. In effect, the ajaho was a gatekeeper who had authority over the 
boundaries between the inside and the outside. He controUed access to 
the palace, deciding who could be presented in audience to the king. 
Described in 1776 as the head of the eunuchs (though it is not dear if he 
was one himself), the ajaho was also charged with the guard of the palace 
and the supervision of the royal drummers. By the 1790S, the ajaho was 
identified as the head of the legede. who were the king's informers. In 
mid-ninetenth century, he would be described as a minister of religion, 
and the person to whom all commoner men who operated outside the 
palace on behalf of the monarchy reported. These five highest officials 
of the king enjoyed special prerogatives at court. Norris reports that he 
and the ministers viewed public ceremonies "seated on stools, placed on 
leopard's skins, at the king's gate, and sheltered under large umbrellas 
from the sun." The prestige of major male officeholders was further en­
hanced by their very public exchange of daughters with the kings.34 
Once a cluster of high-ranking officials had been appointed by a given 
king, they formed an administration that remained intact even after the 
king's death. For example. after Tegbesu died, his direct descendants be­
came a sublineage of the royal line under the direction of a senior son of 
the dead king. The son's title was vigan (vi = child;gan = chief, director), 
or head of the children. Since the vigan were always confirmed in office 
after their fathers' deaths, we can assume that the men who became vigan 
for the various kings were close allies of the new kings. In the case of 
Tegbesu, the vigan's personal name was Agessi Voyon. His sublineage was 
(and is) headquartered in Tegbesu's palace in the Agblome quarter of

--- Page 118 ---
The Age of Tegbesu and Hwanlile 
101 
Abomey. and it is from there that Vigan Agessi Voyon manages Tegbesu 
family affairs in perpetuity. His court includes the titleholders from the 
ministers and other high officers appointed by Tegbesu and the dozen 
or so most prominent sons and daughters of Tegbesu. who are also 
zinkponon. holders of titles or stools. 
High male officials were drawn into alliances with the king that were 
described through an idiom of marriage. The suffix -si in Fongbe means 
wife. A husband was asu and a wife asi. The oldest daughter of the king 
married the migan and became na migansi. The king was ahosu and 
everyone else in the palace-whether eunuch or woman, servant or 
sexual partner of the king-was ahosi. Initiates into congregations of 
vodun were vodunsi. Royal serfs bound to the land were glesi (gie = 
cultivated field). Merchants wereahisi (ahi = market). In short. -si meant 
wife but it also meant dependent. It was applied to virtually any situation 
where a subordinate owed service and loyalty to a superior. and where 
a superior had reciprocal responsibilities to the subordinate. It was used 
for links that otherwise would be called client-patron. though it was not 
limited to strictly human relationships. Dahomeans perceived of these 
relations in terms that were fully gendered. Typical was the history of an 
ancestor recounted by the head of the family of Tegbesu's meu: "Meu 
Sahenni was from Lissezoume labout five miles south of Abomey]. Teg­
besu went there and saw him. He was a very handsome man. and had a 
beautiful neck. Tegbesu went home and asked his father if he could have 
a wife. Agaja gave him the bridewealth and he went back, gave the bride­
wealth to the young man's family. and brought him back to Abomey. He 
gave him the house where Meu Sahenni's descendants still live. His name 
at fust was Kognon [ko = neck; gnon = good]. When Tegbesu reached 
the throne. he called Kognon and gave him a tunic to wear [e.g., made 
him a minister]." 35 The gendered language marked certain legal realities. 
Meu Sahenni's status was comparable to that of a palace woman and he 
was called ahosi. He owed service and loyalty to the king, though he was 
expected to amass resources that would be considered his own and his 
lineage's property. However, as in any marriage in patrilineal Fon society. 
Sahenni's children fell under the legal control of the husband, the king. 
The marriages of the minister's children, for example. would have to be

--- Page 119 ---
102 
The Age of Tegbesu and HwanJife 
formally approved by Tegbesu, or after the king's death by his vigan, 
Agessi Voyon. Though they were not considered to be members of the 
royal family (ahovi), Sahenni and his descendants were part of the per­
manent duster of people around the children of Tegbesu. He was a 
zinkponon, owner of a stool, and enjoyed prestige as a powerful and 
wealthy individual, one involved in the affairs of the descendants ofTeg­
besu in perpetuity. At the same time, he would have been respected by 
his own lineage and been an influential member there. Yet the movement 
of talented and ambitious men from their lineages into permanent ser­
vice to the king had to have had weakening effects on the potential polit­
ical strength of lineages. In short, the legal ties to the monarchy helped 
consolidate state power and undermine that of independent lineages.)6 
The oral account says that Tegbesu provided a place for Sahenni to 
live-a parallel to a man's responsibility to provide housing for a wife. 
Typically, men brought to Abomey to serve as ahosi would be settled with 
their own wives and other dependents in the quarter of Abomey reserved 
for retainers of that particular king. As Abomey and the kingdom grew. 
the royal emplacements and the palaces that served as their cores were 
built farther and farther from the center of the capital city. High-ranking 
officials-male and female-and certain siblings of the king were also 
granted wealth-generating resources of land and labor. In addition to 
receiving a compound site near Abomey, an official might be given one 
or more villages or plantations to provide income. along with slaves 
andlor wives to work the rural lands. For example. the testimony of a de­
scendant of Hwanjile and resident of a village called Agbagnizon (Agban­
lizun). some ten miles south-southwest of Abomey. provides some sense 
of how dependent villages operated. Hwanjile gave birth to Gudu. the 
patron of the village. before she entered the palace of Dahomey. 
When Tegbesu became king, he looked for a place for Gudu and 
found Agbanlizun. the antelope forest [agbanlin = antelope; zun = 
forest]. Gudu appointed someone who is called Gudu Zogo to look 
after his house in Agbanlizun. Gudu Zogo is father of all the chil­
dren of Gudu who live in Agbanlizun. When ceremonies are to be 
held. they are cleared with Gudu Zogo. Legal disputes are settled by 
Gudu. Gudu has five wives. The people of Agbanlizun sent him girls

--- Page 120 ---
The Age of Tegbesu and HwanJife 
103 
as wives. Before, people gave contributions to Gudu, such as maize, 
oil, etc. This continued into the colonial era when the chef de canton 
(district administrator) demanded, in the name of the French, 
twenty·five kilograms of palm nuts and maize from everyone. The 
people carried their tax to the market where the representative of 
the chef de canton collected itY 
The emphasis on oil products reflects the late nineteenth century, and 
the comments on the colonial period provide insights into how the 
French learned to adapt their own administration to previous practices. 
As the account makes clear, dependent villages, which were used to 
supply their patrons in Abomey, were important sources of provisions 
at times of ceremonies and warfare, when their patrons were effectively 
taxed. Men in villages such as these were also summoned to serve with 
the Dahomean army under their patrons. The implications of the system, 
too, provide insights into what has been described as the royal dictum: 
to make Dahomey ever larger. The ideal was more than an ideological 
rallying point; given the ever·growing body of royal dependents whose 
needs had to be supplied by the monarchy, expansion was also a practical 
political imperative. 
In addition to control over villages, certain top officials had jurisdic. 
tion over provinces and could draw portions of tax revenues from them. 
Tegbesu gave the migan, for example. responsibility for oversight of the 
old kingdom of Allada. The governor of Allada, the aplogan, became his 
subordinate at the head of a hierarchy of offices in that province. In simi· 
lar fashion, the meu, as overseer ofWhydah, had authority over the yovo· 
gan and his subordinates. Both officials received a portion of al taxes 
collected in their respective areas. The migan and meu also managed 
prisons. Not only did they receive the benefits of any labor performed 
by prisoners, but all children born of women prisoners became their 
dependents. J3 
At least some high officials at this period had another lucrative source 
of income-the slave trade. Le Herisse says that Agaja, to commemorate 
the conquest of the coast, organized a celebration in Allada during which 
he presented the migan and the gau each with a slave that he authorized 
them to sell, an apparent signal that these ministers would henceforth be

--- Page 121 ---
f 04 
The Age of Tegbesu cmti HwanJlfe 
AOBLOMB 
Bscotl· 
Ho̮ 
̭­
, 
--
, 
-­
, 
--
, 
--
" 
Pal"" 0( ..
.. 
1>
. 
.. 
.. 
, 
0 
' 
, N_ 
A
HW
 .. a.. 
I 
I 
\\'
_
 ... 
, 
I 
, 
-' 
-..,. _of 
I 
.. 
. ̪ ̫̬ 
, 
.. 
Cuml 
, 
.... 
f'IoI:e 
, 
..... < 
' 
-(3" HOiltroNJI,' 
- -
' 
- , 
PoI."",rae.., .... , 
D 
or a .... 
-- - - -- 18Jh.«""l' <kf<""" dW:Io twI ""I 
5. Center of Abomey showing quarters associated with the kings 
permitted to trade in slaves. On the other hand, the evidence of contem­
porary European traders suggests that Agaja attempted to make the trade 
a personal monopoly, and wives of the king, possibly trading on his ac­
count, were known to have traveled back and forth between the coast 
and the Abomey plateau in the late 1720S. In any case, at the latest under 
Tegbesu, certain Dahomean individuals were permitted to trade. The 
monarchy controlled the traffic in two ways: by allowing Dahomeans to 
trade only with the permission of the king or a designated official, and 
by refusing. at least in principle. to allow the sale of persons born in 
Dahomey.l9 
By the 1760s, two sets of official traders were visible at Whydah. The 
first were four or five merchants who worked exclusively for the king. 
The second were private traders (ahisinon, meaning suppliers to mer­
chants), who sold on commission or on their own accounts and who 
were supervised by the state. The ahisinon traded slaves on behalf of per­
sons authorized by the king to trade, probably high officials of the reign­
ing king plus holders of titles, or zinkponon, both royal and commoner, 
of previous reigns. In addition, the private traders handled the trade for

--- Page 122 ---
The Age of Tegbesu and Hwanjile 
105 
suppliers beyond Dahomey. Among the richest private traders in the late 
eighteenth century was a woman named Paussie, whose name was re­
corded only because she ran afoul of Kpengla and was executed. Unfor­
tunately, we have no other references to gender among the ahisinon, 
though women within the palace organization were described trading 
along with the king's male traders in the slave market of Whydah in the 
1770S.4O Whether they were effectively "king's traders," trading on the 
king's account, or whether they were trading for prominent women 
within the palace is not known. The proportion of the slaves supplied by 
sellers other than the king was at times very large. Two recent scholars, 
one using two sample cargoes and the other a traveler's estimate, suggest, 
respectively, that the king's portion of the trade in the late eighteenth 
century was as little as 10 percent and in the 1840S as low as 38 percent. 
Nevertheless, the greatest single trader was always the king.41 
Where did prominent Dahomeans acquire slaves to trade? There were 
three possible sources. First, the king made gifts of slaves to courtiers as 
a reward for service to the monarchy; second, there was an active trade 
in slaves from areas further into the interior, so persons authorized to 
trade could buy and sell as middlemen; third, evidence suggests that at 
least some wealthy Dahomeans traded their own war captives. However, 
there is controversy about this last point: some scholars have argued 
that al war captives were owned by the king. The controversy is impor­
tant, because it relates to the monarchy's later motives for expanding the 
armed forces of women. 
In the eighteenth century, a standing army of the king was apparently 
drawn from the villages controlled directly by the king and hence made 
up of soldiers who were his direct dependents. In addition, titled officials, 
male and female, provided fighters from among the people dependent 
upon them. Dalzel describes the system as follows. "The King ofDahomy 
maintains a considerable standing army, commanded by an Agaow, or 
general, with several other subordinate military officers, who must hold 
themselves in readiness to take the field upon al occasions at the com­
mand of the Sovereign. The payment of these troops chiefly depends on 
the success of the expeditions in which they are engaged. On extraordi­
nary occasions. al the males able to hear arms. are obliged to repair to 
the general's standard; every Caboceer marching at the head of his own

--- Page 123 ---
106 
The Age of Tegbesu and Hwanj/le 
people." Trophies of war were living captives and the heads of enemies, 
both of which were brought back to Dahomey. There are two eyewitness 
accounts of payments made directly by the king to soldiers in exchange 
for the persons or heads of enemies captured or killed in war. On the 
basis of this evidence, some scholars have argued that al war captives 
were "purchased" by the king.42 
However, a mid.nineteenth·century account by John Duncan argues 
that the king had access only to the captives taken by his own soldiers. 
Duncan quotes Gezo as saying that "although he supposed many white 
men believed he sold the greater part of the slaves sent from that country, 
he could assure me it was not the case; but the cabeceers, whose soldiers 
captured them, were always considered to be the owners of slaves taken 
in war." Clearly, the king in the 1840S had reason to dissemble with a 
European who was pressing him to end the trade. As Law points out, "the 
king on this occasion was evidently concerned to minimize the extent of 
his own involvement in the slave trade, in order to evade British pressure 
for its abolition." Yet if Gezo wanted to argue that he profited little from 
the trade, it is odd that he would admit to benefits by adding that "the 
cabeceers always pay a nominal duty upon all slaves taken in war when 
sold.» Also. apparently in response to prodding by Duncan, Gezo admit­
ted that "all prisoners taken by his wives, or female soldiers, were his 
property." The implications of this conversation are twofold. First. as 
Dalze1 implied. there were two groups of war captives. those taken by the 
king's forces and those captured by the soldiers of the king's major offi­
cials. Second. the passage suggests that no individual soldier in fact 
"owned" a person taken in combat, but rather that ownership lay with 
the patron of the soldier, the person upon whom the soldier was depen· 
dent. The suggestion that the king "purchased" captives, then, is distort· 
ing in the same way as is the suggestion that the payment of bride wealth 
meant that a man purchased a wife."3 
Nevertheless. it is clear that something of value was given publicly by 
the king to soldiers at the time that they presented their captives and 
enemy heads at court. Snelgrave in 1727 and Burton in 1864 witnessed 
such payments. The Snelgrave occasion was a war of revenge following a 
raid by the Tuffos. It was not a full-scale war, but rather one in which 
"the King sent part of his Army against them," and hence all of the sol-

--- Page 124 ---
The Age of Tegbesu and Hwanjlfe 
107 
diefs involved could have been the king's. On their return from war, the 
soldiers turned all captives and enemy heads over to the king and in turn 
received twenty shillings each for men, ten shillings for women, boys, and 
girls, and five shillings for heads of dead enemies. At this period of time, 
the price of a male slave at Whydah was £15. or fifteen times the amount 
the king "paid" for a male captive,44 
Obviously, the sums offered were nominal, and did not represent the 
value of a male slave. These symbolic sums for captives and for the heads 
of those killed in fact sound very much like another documented pay­
ment of the kings, the small sums given to ahosi or dependents when 
those persons had performed a service on behalf of the king. Commoner 
wives typically were given a gift when they assisted their husband with 
a productive activity, a principle that was followed within the palace. For 
example, women within the palace pierced and strung cowries to be used 
as the king's currency. Each woman was permitted to keep one of the 
forty cowries meant for each string, which left the strings one short.45 In 
a parallel fashion, the soldiers who were dependents of the king were 
warring for the king, not for themselves. As the king's dependents, or 
ahosi, the product of their work was the king's, and he acknowledged the 
value of their service by rewarding them with nominal sums.46 
The slave trade enriched the king and favored courtiers. It also created 
and enriched a commercial elite at Whydah that would remain peripheral 
to the monarchy's control. Europeans and Africans had traded along the 
Slave Coast for 150 years prior to the Dahomean conquest of Whydah 
and had developed a trading culture that was foreign to the Dahomeans. 
Beginning with Agaja, each eighteenth-century king struggled to under­
stand the coastal culture and to involve Dahomey in it in ways that maxi­
mized the kingdom's interests. The results could never have been wholly 
satisfactory from the monarchy's perspective; one senses a great distance 
between Abomey and the coast, both psychologically and culturally. 
Though technically a part of the kingdom from the 1720S, people at the 
coast spoke always of "going to Dahomey" when they traveled to the 
Abomey plateau, and Abomeans as late as the twentieth century used a 
term of contempt, kogudonu (person from beyond the ko marsh), to de­
scribe people from the coast. During Tegbesu's reign, the Dahomeans 
colonized Whydah, settling three new quarters of the city with people

--- Page 125 ---
108 
The Age of Tegbesu and Hwcmlile 
from the Abomey plateau;·7 the distance between Abomey and Whydah 
nevertheless remained great, and was underlined by the persistence of 
autonomous entrepreneurs and officials at the coast who, though ap­
pointed by the monarchy and subject to royal control, represented an 
economic independence with political overtones that was not known 
among royal appointees on the Abomey plateau. From Abomey's per­
spective, then, Whydah in particular was not only something alien, but 
an entity that could not be wholly controlled. Throughout the history of 
the kingdom, the relations between the kings and prominent coastal in­
dividuals reflected the tension of that incipient independence. 
Evidence from the mid-eighteenth century suggests the difficulties of 
control over the coastal trade that were experienced by the Dahomean 
monarchy. In Agaja's day, the negotiation of prices and customs pay­
ments appears to have been done directly with the king. Snelgrave, for 
example, made his trip to Allada specifically to arrange the terms of trade. 
We know little of the officials at the coast appointed initially by Agaja, 
except that they included translators and collectors of customs who were 
responsible for organizing and supervising the trade. Snelgrave, how­
ever. who was trying to fill his ship through Jakin. found that neither the 
governor of Jakin nor the king's traders were willing to honor the terms 
he had negotiated with the king. Agaja appointed officials at Whydah to 
supervise the trade and the traders, and to trade on the king's behalf. 
Their broad responsibilities would have made them wealthy and power­
ful-and vulnerable to royal displeasure.<f3 
Tegbesu clearly made attempts to ensure that the officials at Whydah 
would be loyal to the monarchy, though it is not clear that he appointed 
persons who knew either Whydah or the trade. Norris provides a telling 
but uncorroborated account of an official appointed to an office called 
the tegan. obviously a forerunner of that of yovogan. Mistaking the word 
tegan for a personal name, Norris cals the official Tanga. He reports that 
the official was a eunuch who had been in Tegbesu's service for a long 
time. The tegan. however, clearly overstepped the bounds of usual inter­
course with the Europeans, offending them in ways that are not specified 
by the contemporary sources. At one point, he forcibly prevented the 
governors of the European forts from traveling to Abomey to complain 
about his behavior. Norris claims that the tegan wanted to make himself

--- Page 126 ---
The Age of Tegbesu and Hwanjl!e 
109 
king of Whydah, which Norris found incomprehensible, since "the post 
which he already possessed was a very honorable one, and his opulence 
so considerable, that it amply afforded him the gratification of every de­
sire, except that of insatiable ambition." After the tegan attempted to take 
the English fort, Tegbesu turned against him and eventually he was killed 
while resisting the Dahomean army. The tegan appears to have served as 
a bitter lesson for Tegbesu. Shortly after, and possibly in the aftermath of 
this incident, Tegbesu ordered all the official traders executed and re­
placed with traders selected by the migan and the meu. These traders or 
their successors would have been the "four or five traders" who worked 
for the king and who were described for the 1760s, along with the inde­
pendent private traders (ahisinon) who acted as agents for other sellers. 
Meanwhile, the office of yovogan appeared. Governor of Whydah and 
supervisor of the trade, the yovogan apparently traded on his own ac­
count, but not on behalf of the king.49 
At the latest by the time of Tegbesu, then, the kings were working 
closely with trusted persons of common birth. We can recognize five top 
male ministers close to Tegbesu in a relationship that was to continue in 
perpetuity. Decendants of these ministers in subsequent generations held 
prestigious titles and sometimes served other kings in other capacities, 
but it is dear that the functions of ministerial office were not hereditary. 
The ministers' relationship to the king was gendered female. Other major 
retainers of the kings were similarly linked to specific kings as the admin­
istration of the kingdom and the court life became increasingly complex. 
Wealth for the king's officials was gained through service to the king. 
though it was never inalienable and power could be revoked. The death 
of a zinkponon, or titleholder, technically returned the entire estate to 
the king. The practice-a crucial element of state power-permitted the 
monarchy to keep a portion of an estate as tax revenue and to control the 
choice of any titleholder's heir. A crime by the zinkponon could mean 
the confiscation of the entire estate and the reduction of family members 
to servile status. Those individuals closest to a king, then, had, in the 
politics of the kingdom, perhaps the greatest wealth and prestige both to 
gain and to risk. Their wealth. however, was always far less than the riches 
controlled by the palace in the name of the king. And even though it 
is not apparent in the mid-eighteenth century, the wealth of the king

--- Page 127 ---
I 1 0  
The Age of Tegbesu and HwanJ/le 
would increasingly be rivaled by the commercial interests that were based 
on the coast and particularly in Whydah. 
The Impact of Oyo .-. 
The young Tegbesu was said to have been a hostage in Oyo and to have 
returned home with ideas for innovations in Dahomey. There are a num­
ber of characteristics similar to Oyo that appear in European accounts 
of Dahomey during Tegbesu's reign. However, deciding which were im­
ported from Oyo can be difficult. 
Dyo and Dahomey were both part of a coastal cultural universe that 
stretched from present-day Ghana nearly to the Niger River, one in 
which broad similarities-in kinship structures, social organization. 
spiritual concepts, and ruling practices-can be discerned. Some Oyo­
like institutions that seem to appear in Dahomey in Tegbesu's time were 
known also in neighboring kingdoms such as Allada or Whydah and 
could have been drawn from them. Also, there is the possibility that cul­
tural characteristics that first appear in the written records during the 
reign of Tegbesu in fact existed previously and were simply not noted by 
earlier observers. The problem of demonstrating Oyo influence, then, is 
not just to show that an institution or practice existed during Tegbesu's 
time; it is also necessary to demonstrate that it did 1I0t exist prior to that 
time and that there was some rationale for it having been imported by 
Dahomey's fourth king. 
Oyo had a system of government in which the power of the king, or 
alafin, was balanced by the oyo mesi, a seven-person grouping of the 
heads of prominent lineages that acted as a check on the aJafin's power. 
The oyo mesi selected the alafin and tended to have ritual and religious 
forms of authority, rather than secular functions in the administration of 
the state. Relations between the oyo mesi and the alafin were in turn 
mediated by the priestly leaders of the Ogboni cult of the earth. If the oyo 
mesi lacked confidence in the king, and if their lack of confidence was 
confirmed ritually, they could demand his suicide. The potential misuse 
of the oyo mesi's power, however, was checked not only by the Ogboni 
but also by the requirement that one member of the oyo mesi die with 
the king. 
In contrast, there were no constitutional checks on the Dahomean

--- Page 128 ---
The Age of Tegbesu and Hwaniile 
I 1 1  
kings' power, and none was imported from Oyo, though by mid­
eighteenth century the kings were in effect sharing power with officials 
drawn from commoner lineages. Indeed, the probable innovations of 
Tegbesu are as telling in what was not adopted from Oyo as in what was. 
For example, no Dahomean official independent of the king ever had the 
authority to determine ifhe continued to enjoy the support of his ances­
tors or the right to demand his suicide. Failed kings in Dahomey were 
deposed only through the extralegal means of assassination and coup. 
The ritual authority over the earth. in the form of Dakodonu and his 
family, had been co-opted by the monarchy during the reign of Agaja, 
though other earth-deities would become problematic for later kings. 
Other religious authorities were subordinated by the monarchy through 
Hwanjile's administrative control over Mawu and lisa, under whom were 
ranked all the other vodun. The new institutions that appeared in mid­
eighteenth-century Dahomey can aU be linked to the monarchy's efforts 
to centralize control and exercise power efficiently and effectively. Inno­
vations from Oyo were directed to two related goals: (I) the mystification 
of the king and his entourage, and (2) the centrali2ation of the adminis­
tration of the kingdom, in large part through the more creative use of 
eunuchs and slaves. 
Oral traditions collected among Tegbesu's descendants say that he 
brought three cultural innovations back from Oyo: umbrellas, the gods 
Heviosso and Sakpata, and Oyo-style clothing. In fact, these were among 
the least likely imports. Umbrellas were a widespread symbol of high 
rank throughout the Slave Coast and were specifically noted at the court 
of Agaja in the 1720S. Parallels to Heviosso and Sakpata existed in Oyo; 
they were Shango, the god of thunder, and Shoponna, or Obaluiaye, 
the god associated with smallpox. However, traditions associated with 
Heviosso claim that this vodun was brought to Dahomey during the 
period of Tegbesu, but from the town of Hevie (south of Allada), where 
Heviosso had previously been established. Sakpata's origins are linked to 
Mahi country to the north, and Sakpata's entry into Dahomey is associ­
ated with the reign of Agaja. Clothing at every historical period in Da­
homey was diverse at court, and included styles from the Muslim north, 
the Akan west, the Yoruba-speaking east, and Europe (the latter coming 
from the south. via the coastal ports). Early accounts of the kingdom

--- Page 129 ---
I 12 
The Age of Tegbesu and Hwanjile 
note a predilection on the part of the kings for European fabrics and 
accessories. The Yoruba agbada, a gown that later became an emblem of 
ministerial rank in Dahomey, could have been imported in Tegbesu's 
time. Chenevert and Bulet report that court dress for men was "like a 
surplice without sleeves," which could be a description of an agbada.so 
Another element indirectly associated with attire-the public appear­
ance of the king-changed at least in part during Tegbesu's reign. In 
Oyo, as elsewhere in Yorubaland, the king, or alafin, was surrounded by 
ritual restrictions associated with his divine nature. The alafin appeared 
publicly outside the palace only three times a year, to participate in sacred 
festivals. The face of the alafin, said to he so radiant that human eyes 
could not gaze upon it, was hidden behind a veil of strings of heads hang­
ing from his beaded crown. Some of the trappings ofYoruba divine mon­
archy seem to have been practiced beginning in Tegbesu's time, appar­
ently to distance and mystify the kingship, although the well-being of 
Dahomey was never associated with the health of the king. Tegbesu's pre­
decessor, Agaja, was described as regularly moving about the kingdom, 
in explicit contrast not only to the rulers of Oyo but also of Allada and 
Whydah. Agaja accompanied his troops to war and seems to have been 
relatively accessible. Tegbesu, in contrast, was isolated from public view. 
Pommegorge says that he appeared in public only once a year, for four 
or five minutes, during one particular ceremony at Customs. The rest of 
the time, if he did leave the palace, it was in a closed hammock.51 Neither 
Tegbesu nor any other Dahomean king was recorded as wearing a beaded 
crown. However, Norris describes a woman at court in 1772 who was "too 
sacred to be seen" and was shielded from his view by "targets ofJeather, 
covered with red and blue taffata, with which they encompassed her," a 
description that evokes the effect of the veils of beads over the faces of 
Yoruba-speaking kings.52 Why would palace women wear garb meant 
for a divine king? From time to time in Dahomey, there are accounts of 
the kings honoring trusted retainers by transferring ritual restrictions to 
them rather than undergoing the inconvenience of observing the restric­
tions themselves. Such may have been the case with the secluded wife,5l 
There were three categories of palace official in Oyo: eunuchs, ilari 
(scar-head, in Yoruba), and titled officers. Highest in rank were the eu-

--- Page 130 ---
The Age of Tegbesu and Hwanjile 
I 13 
nuchs, who guarded the king's wives and children. Among them were 
three central officials who were responsible respectively for judicial de­
cisions, for supervision of the shrine of Shango, and for collection of 
revenues and other administrative duties. Eunuchs had not been present 
at Agaja's court, but they were very visible during Tegbesu's reign, and in 
capacities that paralleled their use in Oyo. Armed women had served as 
palace guards in Dahomey at least since the 172.0S; in 1772., Norris found 
eunuchs along with armed women guards at the gates of the Abomey 
palace. Some worked within the palace, and those who were in dose at­
tendance on the king wore women's dress. At least by the end of the cen­
tury and probably dating from Tegbesu's reign, eunuchs also served as 
legede. Legede would accompany ambassadors, ministers, and other of­
ficials outside the presence of the king to ensure that they conveyed mes­
sages to and from the king with accuracy. At least on some occasions, 
they acted as interpreters between Europeans and the king. The term 
legede came down into modern Fongbe with strong negative connota­
tions,suggesting a tattletale or informer. A description oflegede in 1797 
marks the first mention of what would become descriptions of multiple 
layers of extra eyes and ears placed around the officials of the king to 
ensure their loyalty. 54 
Tegbesu also appointed eunuchs to two very sensitive and powerful 
ministries: the tegan (later, yovogan) of Whydah and the ajaho. As we 
saw above, the tegan ofWhydah proved to be a poor choice. The eunuch 
ajaho may not have been entirely successful, either. Although he re­
mained technically responsible for the eunuchs within the palace, over 
time the ajaho became better known for two other roles: appointments 
secretary for the king. controlling who was allowed into the audience 
courtyards, and supervisor of the legede, hence " chief of the king's secret 
police." By the mid-nineteenth century, sources cite the tononu, an im­
portant officer in the interior of the palace, as the head of the eunuchs. 
lndeed, even Tegbesu's enthusiasm for eunuchs may have diminished 
over time; by the 1760s, only twelve boys were being castrated each year 
to join their ranks.55 Nevertheless, eunuchs are cited as important players 
in palace politics in the 1790S. Eunuchs would continue to be involved 
in the court until the French conquest. but they were less prominent in

--- Page 131 ---
/ /4 
The Age of Tegbesu and Hwanjlle 
later reigns, and I have no evidence that any later yovogan or ajaho was 
a eunuch. Legede, too, do not appear to have been eunuchs in the nine­
teenth century. 
The title ilari (scar-head) was a reference to the initiation of a group 
of Oyo royal slaves whose heads were shaved and incisions made on them 
rubbed with empowering medicines. After their initiation, ilari wore a 
distinctive hairstyle, with alternate sides of the head being shaved at in­
tervals. There were hundreds of il ari in Oyo-male and female. They 
worked as the king's bodyguard, as messengers, as highly-placed servants, 
and as tax coUectors.56 Although they had existed in the kingdom of 
Whydah earlier in the century, ilari were first mentioned as messengers 
ofthe Dahomean king only after Tegbesu came to power, in January 1746. 
Following that date, Europeans often spoke of the "half-heads," who 
were called either the generic wensagon, meaning messenger, or lali, a 
term obviously derived from the Yoruba. Pommegorge describes one 
who arrived in the company of the Yovogan to deliver the king's greetings 
to a new commander of the French fort. "He [the yovoganl brings with 
him the messenger of the king, who has half his head shaved, the other 
half with all his hair, a sash. like our bodyguards, except that it is com­
posed of fourteen or fifteen rows of human teeth, threaded one against 
the other, and for clothing, only a kind of short silk skirt twenty to 
twenty-four inches long; it is placed on the hips and reaches to the bot­
tom of the knees."5? 
An element of the structure of ilari in Oyo may have served as inspi­
ration for the male-female doubling of offices in Dahomey that would 
become prominent at court in the nineteenth century. The Reverend 
Samuel Johnson, an African with Oyo roots who collected oral traditions 
in New Oyo, writes that "every male Ilari has a female counterpart who 
is called his companion. The Ilaris themselves by courtesy call them 
their 'mother.' They are both created at one and the same time and they 
are supposed to seek each other's interest, although there must be no 
intimacy between them; the female I1aris being denizens of the King's 
harem." In fact, not just the ilari, but all male palace officials had court 
mothers in Oyo. In Dahomey, descendants of Tegbesu claim that there 
were female counterparts to the gbonugan daho (ministers of state) dur-

--- Page 132 ---
The Age of Tegbesu and Hwanjile 
J J 5 
ing their ancestor's reign. These palace women were identified by the 
suffix -non, which like -si was a gendered suffix. Translated as mother 
and used to indicate biological motherhood, -non was also used more 
broadly to signal ownership or the holding of a charge or responsibility. 
For example, the mother of a girl named Hwefa was called Hwefanon. 
The head of a congregation of vodun was a vodunon. A seUer of maize or 
corn (gbade) was gbadenon. The head of a household (hwe) was hwenon. 
In Tegbesu's time, the counterpart to the meu was the meunon, a woman 
whose personal name was Naye Yeme and whose zinkponon (titleholder) 
stil lives in Abomey. The title meunon was normally translated "mother 
of the meu" in European languages.È8 
The third category of Oyo officials were titled officers. Titled officials 
were known in kingdoms throughout the Slave Coast. However, at least 
one office, that of sogan (so = horse; gan = chief, director), the "master 
of the horse," may have been adapted from Oyo during Tegbesu's time. 
In Oye, the olokun esin, or master of the horse (literally, the chief holder 
of the bridle of the king's horse) was one of the most important of the 
high-ranking officials. He supervised the royal stables and was required 
to die with the king. The master of the horse and his assistants also fol­
lowed the army to organize the gathering of fodder for the horses. 59 The 
evidence for an Oyo connection for the Dahomean office of sogan is far 
from conclusive. There had also been a master of the horse in Allada and 
the office could have been introduced into Dahomey from there well 
before Tegbesu, though there is no mention of it prior to Tegbesu's reign. 
My suspicion that the sogan was introduced from Oyo is based on the 
fact that it was an anomaly for Dahomey. A master of the horse in Oyo, 
a horse-riding culture, was a major position. [n Dahomey, horses were 
rare, and the Dahomeans never developed the regular use of them, either 
as cavalry or as domestic animals. Horses were sometimes presented to 
officials as gifts of the king, but riding was ceremonial. In fact, the largest 
number of horses ever noted at court at one time was seen by Norris, 
who on one day in 1772 saw seven horses waiting to be sacrificed and the 
heads of thirty-two others that had been killed in earlier ceremonies.60 
In Dahomey, the sogan in mid-eighteenth century was said to have 
two functions: responsibility for the care of "criminals" and supervision

--- Page 133 ---
1 16 
The Age of Tegbesu and Hwanjlle 
of the plantations that provisioned the palace. The sogan was later de· 
scribed as a military officer of high rank, but he was nevertheless left 
behind with the baggage and camp followers during a war in 1775. At the 
end of the eighteenth century, the sogan was said to be responsible for 
receiving war captives and accounting for them to the meu. In addition, 
he distributed the horsemeat from equine sacrifices. And by the late nine· 
teenth century, the sogan was described as a minor official responsible 
for providing wood and water for the palace, but also with responsibility 
for supervision of the captives who were to work the royal plantations.61 
There are several possible explanations for this seeming multiplicity 
of functions over time. First, some of the Europeans who recorded 
these various responsibilities could have misunderstood their Dahomean 
sources; or we may be looking at different ways of describing related 
functions. The "criminals" in the sogan's care could have been war cap· 
tives, for example, who were put to work on royal plantations; supervis· 
ing the plantations that provisioned the palace and providing wood and 
water would seem to be related functions, and remaining behind during 
warfare similarly suggests provisioning responsibilities. Alternatively. the 
functions of the sogan could have been changing over time. We have no 
way of knowing precisely what were the responsibilities of the sagan at 
any given time, and most particuJariy at the moment that the office was 
created in Dahomey. One point that the eighteenth.century sources make 
clear, however, is that during that period the sogan ranked among the 
highest officials of state; that he was, in fact, a minister of state. 
The fact that a master of the horse had virtually nothing to do with 
horses-or at least with living horses-hints that the position may have 
been created in Dahomey only because of its importance as an office in 
Oyo. The master of the horse died with the king in Oyo, which meant 
that he was one of a handful of officials, male and female, who worked 
very closely with the person of the alafin, who were required to commit 
suicide when the king died and in whom the king had absolute trust. 
Dalzel relates a story about a Dahomean sogan that provides an ideal 
model for such loyal behavior. During the Grand Customs for Tegbesu 
in 1775. the yovogan was accused in a whisper campaign of disrespect for 
the king. Kpengla very nearly beheaded him and the man was saved from 
•

--- Page 134 ---
The Age of Tegbesu and HwanJile 
J J 7 
sudden public execution only by the intercession of the migan. The sogan 
then gave a speech in which he swore to commit suicide at the least hint 
of any disloyalty, rather than be subject to similar allegations. When the 
sogan was later captured in war, the king ransomed him. but the sogan 
refused to return; rather, he reminded people of his previous speech 
and committed suicide.62 The sogan may have been an important official 
from Tegbesu's perspective, then, not because of the monarchy's need for 
a caretaker for horses, but because of the king's need for people who 
could be trusted. An official who knew that he or she would die on the 
day of the death of the king would without question be interested in 
promoting the well-being of the monarch and his administration. Al­
though some wives were reportedly required to die when the kings of 
Allada and Whydah died. it is very likely that specific offices within the 
palace became associated with a requirement of death during the reign of 
Tegbesu. 
There is a final Oye-linked characteristic of the courts of Tegbesu and 
the kings who followed him in the fifty years after his death; that was the 
increased importance of the town of Cana, some seven and one-half 
miles southeast of Abomey. Cana is mentioned in early written accounts 
of Dahomey. It was sited centrally in the small area of the Abomey plateau 
that oral traditions link to the religious and political beginnings of what 
became Dahomey. As early as the 1730S, the Dahomeans were reported to 
be performing ceremonies there. Its location would have made it a logical 
stopping point in the trade route from Oyo to Allada and the coast, and 
there were Yoruba-speaking settlers in Cana from early in the recorded 
history of Dahomey. 
The centrality of Cana after the mid-eighteenth century was very pos­
sibly the result of Oye exactions rather than Dahomean choice. because 
Norris reports that the 1748 settlement with Oye required that tribute be 
paid to Oye each November in Cana, and visitors to the town told of 
seeing Oye ambassadors there. By the early 1770S, Cana was beginning 
to rival Abomey in size, with an estimated population of fifteen thou­
sand. Abomey's was twenty-four thousand. There are suggestions in the 
sources that Cana had become the effective seat of government by this 
period. From Tegbesu to Gezo, each king built a royal palace in Cana,

--- Page 135 ---
1 18 
The Age of Tegbesu and Hwanjlfe 
and Norris testifies that Tegbesu frequently resided there. Hwanjile, his 
powerful kpojito, was buried at Cana, and Dalze1 describes Cana as the 
place where the king "generally resides," though he would go to Abomey 
to perform Customs. Agonglo, arranging ceremonies for Kpengla, had 
slaves sacrificed in his path so that he "would walk in blood, all the 
way from Calmina [Canal to Abomey, to see his father." Contemporary 
Europeans speak without comment of meetings with the kings at Cana, 
which suggests that it was an accepted center of government.63 
Cana's importance would decline in the first half of the nineteenth 
century, when Dahomey was no longer subject to Oyo. By midcentury, 
travelers began to describe Cana as the old capital-the capital when 
Dahomey was a tributary state of Dyo. So important had been Cana's 
position that at least one visitor believed that Abomey itself had been 
founded after the accession of Gezo in c. 1818. As of the 1840S, Gana was 
visited by the court only once a year, when upon the return from anual 
warfare the king would spend a month there to perform ceremonies in 
honor of the royal ancestors and then continue to Abomey to celebrate 
Customs there.64 
Dyo, then, clearly had an impact on Dahomey at the level of state or­
ganization and functioning. The Oyo empire was administered through 
the use of male and female slaves. of eunuchs, and of a number of female 
officials within the palace. Possibly following the Oyo model, Tegbesu 
entrusted high office to eunuchs, though with mixed success. In the 
meantime, slaves and women within the palace organization were prov­
ing their worth to the monarchy. Women slaves in particular, in the form 
of young captives, were growing up in a palace organization that chan­
neled their talents and energies and offered them rich material rewards 
for loyal service. The latter part of the eighteenth century would prove 
to he the high period of women's power in the court of the kings of 
Dahomey ......

--- Page 136 ---
,<:'7>' 
4 
The Struggle to Maintain 
the State 
The people of the country are hospitable. They gladly offer you lodging 
and refreshments . . . .  Roads are safe, to the point that you can travel 
at night as well as during the day. 
P. Labarthe. describing Dahomey in 1803 
The Reigns of Kpengla, Agonglo, and Adandozan  
Tegbesu's was a long and vigorous reign. During his more than thirty 
years in power, the Dahomean monarchy consolidated its domination of 
the Abomey plateau heartland and much of the territory it had con­
quered. It established a kind of Pax Dahomiensis. Order, discipline, and 
relative affluence were characteristics of the civil populace as observed by 
Europeans of the period. The monarchy succeeded in accommodating 
Oyo, negotiating a tributary status that gave the kingdom reasonable se­
curity on its eastern boundaries and freed it to deal with neighbors to the 
north, west, and south. Internal opposition to the monarchy and the 
royal family ended, at least for the time being, and there were few signs 
by 1770 that the legitimacy of the regime was still being questioned. The 
integration of captive peoples, particularly women into the palace orga­
nization. was producing a vigor that enriched the kingdom culturally as 
well as socially. Accounts of Dahomean history tend to name as two of 
the more important monarchs Agaja and Gezo: Agaja is praised for ex­
pansion to the coast and Gezo for administrative innovations. However, 
without the consolidations of Tegbesu's period, Agaja's triumph over 
Whydah and Allada might have been lost. And many of the so-called 
innovations of Gezo were in fact the innovations of Tegbesu, present in 
Dahomey in the mid--eighteenth century and ready to be enlarged and 
1 1 9

--- Page 137 ---
120 
The Struggle to Maintain the Stafe 
elaborated in the nineteenth. In retrospect. the reign ofTegbesu takes on 
the glow of a golden age. 
The final years of Tegbesu's reign, however. were characterized by de­
cline. As the king aged and his health began to fail, a certain lassitude set 
in politically and economically, as if Tegbesu were in fact a divine king 
whose kingdom reflected his physical state. Chenevert and Bulet argue 
that. in his later years, Tegbesu "neglected all sorts of business: this neg­
ligence passed to his ministers. and there was disorder in finances. in the 
troops, in commerce." The army by the early 1770S was said to include 
only three thousand men. As late as a decade after Tegbesu's death, 
a French visitor claimed that the Dahomeans could muster only eight 
thousand to ten thousand soldiers. I By the time Kpengla came to power, 
Weme was independent and allied with the former rulers of Allada 
against Dahomey. The Allada ruling line had established itself east of the 
Weme River under the protection of Oyo. and it ultimately consolidated 
its rule in the trading center of Porto Novo. The Hweda were regularly 
raiding Whydah beach. and African traders, particularly those from Oyo. 
avoided the kingdom and took their slaves to ports further east. Supplies 
of slaves and trade revenues at Whydah dropped and the monarchy was 
forced to begin selling Dahomeans. Dahomey had begun a long period 
of economic stagnation that was related to the decline of the overseas 
slave trade. 
Slaves would continue to be virtually the sole overseas export of Da­
homey throughout the reigns of Kpengla. Agonglo. and Adandozan. 
Wars between European nations, international recession, and changing 
policies among the various overseas buyers over the decades from 1774 to 
1818 created variations in the levels of trade that masked the progression 
of the slave trade toward its inevitable end, something that can be seen 
clearly only in retrospect. Each of the three kings tried various remedies 
to make trade thrive. But the overseas trade represented an integration 
of the kingdom into a larger economic system whose fluctuations were 
beyond the ability of the Dahomeans to control. The experience of the 
monarchy under Kpengla typified the position of Dahomey. Early in 
Kpengla's reign, the monarchy tried to improve the military and capture 
larger numbers of slaves to sell. When that did not bring a return of

--- Page 138 ---
The Struggle to Maintain the State 
121 
prosperity. they made the situation worse by trying to monopolize the 
trade. fixing prices. and forcing traders to sell slaves to the monarchy at 
less than market prices. Traders avoided Dahomey, and Porta Novo, 
some forty-five miles to the southeast, flourished. In the end, the slave 
trade revived slightly only after changes over which Dahomey had no 
control: the resumption of European interest in slaving following the 
American War of Independence and the relative decline in the attractive­
ness of Porto Novo when Oyo, weakened and sliding into permanent 
decline, could no longer protect it from Dahomean raids.l 
After Kpengla's death in 1789, Agonglo and Adandozan faced even 
more serious, long-term threats to the health of the slave trade. The 
French abolished the trade in 1794, then relegalized it in 1802. The En­
glish abolished the trade in 1807 and began the process of suppression 
that ultimately led a string of envoys to Abomey to try to negotiate its 
end. By the first decade of the nineteenth century, all three European 
trading forts at Whydah-English, French, and Portuguese-had been 
dosed. Another revival of the trade and some improvement in the 
economic situation began only after 1810, when an Anglo-Portuguese 
treaty was signed allowing the slave trade to continue out of Whydah. 
Even that legal loophole was closed by 1815, after which all trade from 
along the Slave Coast technically was prohibited and the slave trade be­
came clandestine. 
Was Dahomey wholly dependent upon the slave trade? Having en­
joyed a certain prosperity and strength in the mid--eighteenth century as 
a result of the trade, could the kingdom have survived without overseas 
trade-in slaves or any other commodity? With the kingdom suffering 
depopulation, keeping slaves in-country would have offered increased 
economic productivity. Overseas imports, one can argue, were luxury 
items: cloth and other manufactured goods, tobacco, cowries, alcohol, 
and firearms. Making an abolitionist argument in the 1780s, Pruneau 
de Pommegorge comments with reference to Dahomean imports: "The 
country produces everything that is essentially necessary to life." Pom­
megorge was correct in asserting that Dahomey produced all that was 
necessary for subsistence, but he missed a central point: that Dahomey's 
was far from a subsistence economy. For example, domestic surplus had

--- Page 139 ---
122 
The Struggle to Maintain the State 
for years supported the state through taxation and tribute payments. 
Accounts from AlIada and Whydah prior to the Dahomean conquest de­
scribe a number of taxes, all of which existed later in Dahomey (along 
with additional levies). There were taxes on sales in the markets, on 
entries into the kingdom and the crossing of rivers, on agricultural pro­
duction, on inheritance, annually on all adult men, and on cash incomes. 
Collection of market taxes and travel tolls was done locally with the 
collectors and their superiors retaining a portion before sending the re­
mainder to Abomey. The greatest public payment of taxes was at the time 
of Customs, as Norris reports, when ministers and governors of prov­
inces came with gifts, and African traders and heads of families brought 
"a quantity of cowries, proportioned to their circumstances: each of them 
endeavours to make his present (which is in fact a tax) as respectable as 
he can." Law points out that Norris may have been witnessing the pay­
ment of taxes on traders' cash incomes. Norris could in addition have 
been watching the taxing of all adult males. We cannot be sure, and the 
point is an important one, since a portion of taxes collected outside the 
paJace was retained by the collector. Taxes brought to the palace would 
have gone directly into the royal treasury.3 
In addition to taxes on individuals and their activities, tribute was re­
ceived from states dominated by Dahomey. Payments in kind made by 
prominent persons who had been given control over villages or planta­
tions were also effectively tribute. They included foodstuffs and other 
provisions that were an essential part of the maintenance of the palace 
population and the preparations for Customs. On a lower social level, 
labor power was extracted from the common people. The Dahomean 
monarchy required villages to provide young men for the standing army 
and family heads to offer young women for the palace organization. Un­
fortunately, we do not know how often such human tribute was de­
manded in this period. Chenevert and Bulet say that labor for public 
works was required on the part of people who lived reasonably near 
transportation routes. In 1779, for example. the Dahomean chiefs mus­
tered their subjects to broaden to thirty feet the road that ran from 
Abomey to the beach at Whydah. However, Oalzel insists that the king 
paid the laborers involved in such public works.4

--- Page 140 ---
The Struggle to Maintain the State 
J 23 
The system of domestic taxation and tribute underlined the nature of 
Dahomey as a state with a fully monetarized economy. The cowries that 
served as its currency were the single largest import of the overseas trade. 
The Dahomean money supply, then, was inextricably linked into the 
overseas trade. But cowries were only the most numerous of a number 
of imports. The others were luxury goods and war materiel. There were 
enormous profits made from the sale of slaves in the name of the king, 
and prominent individuals in Dahomey were licensed to sell in their own 
names as well In exchange, those who traded received commodities and 
manufactured goods that were highly valued: a wide variety of textiles, 
guns and powder, beads, tobacco, alcohol, and metals that included iron, 
brass, copper, silver, and gold. There is evidence that the monarchy at­
tempted at times to monopolize or at least to control the distribution of 
guns, powder, and iron bars (which could be made into shot). In addi­
tion, certain luxury items such as coral beads, gold, and silver were mo­
nopolized, or at any rate hoarded. Were the king and the other members 
of the monarchy, then, just merchant capitalists greedy to maximize ma­
terial profits? 
The trade goods that Dahomey acquired from overseas were more 
than luxury items to be used for the personal indulgence of a ruling elite. 
They were tied to the political economy in the sense that they provided a 
means by which the monarchy and powerful persons in the kingdom 
solidified their patronage. The truest wealth in Dahomey was not in ma­
terial goods, but in control over dependents and followers: kinspeople, 
wives, slaves, and pawns. Though legal statuses were technically inflex­
ible, many dependent individuals had a certain amount of latitude in the 
way that they became attached to patrons. Kinship was a basis for social 
relations. yet kinship was flexible and fluid. A titleholder (zinkponon) 
perceived as powerful could attract poor kinspeople as followers. Individ­
uals, including women, involved in marital negotiations often had some 
say in the determination of marriage alliances. Marriage as a social idiom 
linked individuals of either sex in patron-client relationships. Oath taking 
also re-formed alliances and ties of obligation, so that individuals had 
some ability to transfer their support from one patron to another. The 
slave trade reinforced the system, because it permitted the monarchy and

--- Page 141 ---
124 
The Struggle to Maintain the State 
other powerful individuals to create wealth through the trade and the 
manipulation of human beings and imported goods. The king, ministers, 
prominent members of the royal family. male titleholders. caboceers. and 
titled women could trade slaves or use their dependents to gain captives. 
Some slaves would be retained and others exchanged for the luxury goods 
that were material signs of their owners' wealth and that would in turn 
attract more followers and dependents. The most obvious means for 
demonstrating one's control over resources was to flaunt and distribute 
them. In effect, by giving away people and goods, wealthy men and 
women could attract additional people, who then helped to produce 
more people and goods. 
Within this system, the king and his apparent wealth were paramount. 
The king was the largest single slave trader, the person in whose name 
duties and fees were extracted at Whydah, the individual to whom all 
Dahomeans owed taxes, tribute, and indeed their very lives. In principle, 
all Dahomeans were dependents of the king. His wealth and that of the 
state were synonymous, because the king ruled in the name of the dy­
nasty. In addition to direct revenues from trade, the terms of trade at 
Whydah themselves enhanced royal revenues. The king's representative 
received first a payment in goods for the right to trade, its amount de­
pending upon the size of the slave ship. An additional customs payment 
was required for each slave sold. Overseas slave traders were forced to 
purchase the king's slaves first, and at a price higher than the prices paid 
for other slaves. The total returned to the king from the sale of the king's 
slaves and the terms of trade is not known, but it has to have been im­
pressive. Akinjogbin estimates that revenues in 1750 from the export of 
the king's slaves alone were between $605,000 and $800,000 in 1960s 
U.S. dollars.5 A British visitor in the 1840S believed that the king's reve­
nues from the slave trade, including the sale of his own slaves (based on 
the export of eight thousand slaves, of which three thousand were the 
king's), was $)00,000 annually (in nineteenth-century dollars).6 
Not only did the king, or the state, have access to the greatest means of 
acquiring material wealth, the monarchy held the trump cards in ensur­
ing that the king's revenues always outstripped those of any Dahomean 
individual. With the backing of its military power, the monarchy, in the

--- Page 142 ---
The Struggle to Maintain the State 
125 
king's name, could control the level of accumulation of any individual. 
Important and influential men and women in Dahomey enlarged their 
personal resources yet had to be careful not to exceed the wealth of the 
king) or appear even to begin to rival his position, because the king held 
the ultimate sanction. That sanction might be exercised in two ways: the 
king could opt to keep large portions of the estate of a deceased indi­
vidual, or a person could be accused of crimes against the state and 
stripped of both dependents and material wealth. 
The king's generosity-and hence his power and affluence-was most 
visible at the time of Customs, when he offered gifts to those who sup­
ported him: to the royal ancestors upon whom the kingdom depended 
for its weU-being, and to the loyal subjects who worked to help Dahomey 
reach its destiny. The bulk of the material wealth distributed at Customs 
was in trade goods, hut supplemented with locally manufactured items, 
foodstuffs, and, most importantly, the most valuable possession of al, hu­
man beings. The size of royal largesse toward any individual was in direct 
proportion to the importance of the recipient. The poorest of the royal 
subjects were the people that Europeans typically described scrambling 
for cloth, cowries, tobacco, and beads thrown from a platform where the 
king, a group of palace women, the ministers of state, and European vis­
itors were seated. Food and alcoholic drink were provided regularly dur­
ing Customs to large numbers of people. Dalzel, for example, describes 
food and locally brewed beer that had been prepared within the palace 
being carried in procession by palace women and distributed "not only 
among the more distinguished guests, but even without the camp, where 
the vulgar partake plentifully." Higher-ranking persons were also given 
cloth and captives. Norris recounts that the governors of towns and prov­
inces received a gift, "generally a large cotton cloth, manufactured in the 
Eyo [Oyo] country, of excellent workmanship, which they afterwards 
wear for an upper garment." European visitors and their entourages were 
lodged and boarded at royal expense from the moment they left the coast. 
They also received gifts, the most valuable being at the point of departure 
from Abomey, when they were usually given locally made cotton cloth 
and one or two female slaves. Dalzel argues that the value of what was 
received by the European traders far outweighed their own annual gifts

--- Page 143 ---
126 
The Struggle to MaIntain the State 
of silk, brandy, and other items. which Dalzel valued at £50. Ministers of 
state were formally appointed at the time of Customs. and presumably it 
was at that time that they were given gifts of control over people. villages, 
and plantations.7 
Palace women were bestowed as wives during the same period. Poorer 
people paid a form of bridewealth in exchange for women who were 
probably war captives. Higher-ranking individuals received women as 
outright gifts. Theoretically. the highest-ranking royal honor was the en­
nobling of a commoner by marriage with a princess. Princesses were 
presented publicly to their husbands at Customs and sent off from the 
palace with a generous dowry of servants and goods. The formal ties 
between king and ministers, for example, were cemented through mar­
riage. The king's elder daughter (i.e., the one recognized as most senior. 
the na daho) became a wife of the migan. Her first junior sister married 
the meu. In exchange. daughters of ranking officials entered the palace; 
we do not have specific evidence of precisely where they were placed in 
the hierarchy, except for a nineteenth-century observation that indicates 
that social hierarchy was preserved within the palace.! 
The granting of gifts and the public displays of royal generosity were 
supplemented by ostentatious parades of the wealth of the monarchy, 
and particularly the unique precious items that were derived from the 
overseas trade. The lengthy processions of the king's wealth. viewed with 
contempt by generations of bored European visitors. were material dem­
onstrations of the king's status, visible signs that the royal ancestors con­
tinued to favor the dynasty and abundant evidence of the continued 
prosperity of the kingdom. Processions of the king's wealth in the late 
eighteenth century were described by Pomrnegorge: "He [the king] has 
al that he possesses in his houses brought out through a door and carried 
on the head of . . .  women, as in a procession, one after the other. These 
riches consist of baskets of coral, of fabric of gold or silk, or of silver, of 
bundles of silk and cotton cloth, of some vases of silver, and generally 
of all that he owns." Norris similarly said of the 1772 Customs that "there 
was a display of the king's furniture and trinkets, most of the women 
carrying something or other of his; some of them fine swords; others 
silver-mounted guns; above a hundred of them held either gold, or silver-

--- Page 144 ---
The Struggle to Maintain the State 
J 27 
6. Public Pr()Ce$ion of the King'! Women, from Archibald Dalzel, The History of Dahomy 
(London, 1793) 
headed canes, in their hands; and that none might be unprovided, some 
carried a candlestick, and others a lamp, perhaps fifty at least of each, 
with many other articles; which were al held up for the gaping multitude 
to admire.» 9 
Popular belief held that the king kept a length of every pattern and 
calor of every different fabric brought through Whydah. In fact, mid­
nineteenth-century visitors saw an enormous strip of patchwork cloth, 
said to have been created during the reign of Gezo. Its size was estimated 
at four hundred to six hundred yards long by two to three yards wide. 
Twentieth-century descendants of the monarchy similarly claimed that a 
princess, Na Agbanukwen, appeared annually during Customs wearing 
a wrapper that included a length of cloth from every diferent fabric ever

--- Page 145 ---
128 
The Struggle to Maintain the State 
imported. A visitor in 1871 said of the cloth that "the pieces are not of uni­
form size, varying from a square foot to a full-sized piece, three feet by 
nine. The various kinds of cloth, such as denhams. chintzes. silks, vento­
pullams, velvets, &c., are arranged hap-hazard, and are of every hue and 
design that can be imagined. Reds, blues, greens, yellows, browns, blacks, 
and whites are mingled indiscriminately; while striped, checked, plaid, 
and figured patterns add to the medley.")O 
Following Dahomean social norms, European traders brought gifts 
when they came for audiences with the kings, who in turn did not hesitate 
to order special items of European manufacture. In 1772. for example. 
Norris presented Tegbcsu with a chamber organ and a sedan chair of red 
morocco leather. A tiny sample of the accumulated gifts of Europeans as 
seen in 1850 included-along with hundreds of other items of European 
manufacture-two glass chandeliers. a four-poster bed with crimson 
silk damask curtains. chariots and coaches, a rocking chair, and a toilet 
table with drawers and mirror. The grand procession of the king's wealth 
that year would involve 6,500 persons and innumerable objects of Euro­
pean and African manufacture. All of the riches of the monarchy­
cowries, trade goods, gifts, and provisions-were stored in the palaces of 
the king. It is little wonder, then. that the position of keeper ofthe stores 
would have been one of great responsibility and power. And it is little 
wonder that the story of the mother of Tegbesu's rival, who offered the 
treasures of the king to 0YO. would have spoken volumes to Dahomeans 
about the powers of women within the palace and women's potential for 
involvement in the state. [I 
The luxury goods imported as a result of the overseas trade were an 
underpinning of the system of patronage by which coalitions formed and 
competed for power. Dahomey's famous dictum. that each king make the 
kingdom always greater. was an economic as well as territorial dictate. 
The monarchy-that is the kings and their immediate followers-could 
il afford to be perceived as less prosperous or less strong than their pre­
decessors. A reduction in the quantity of such sumptuous goods threat­
ened a reduction in the numbers offoUowers and supporters of the king. 
In effect. participation in the slave trade had drawn Dahomey into an 
international commercial network from which it could withdraw only at 
the cost of the possible destruction of its social and political system.

--- Page 146 ---
The Struggle to Maintain the State 
129 
To what extent were the Dahomeans aware of this relationship to a 
changing world economy? Did they fully understand the importance of 
the slave trade to their own political economy? Later. the kings would 
argue, as had Pommegorge. that they had lived without European goods 
in the past and could do so again. Yet when it finally became clear that 
the slave trade was no longer viable, they focussed their energies not on 
cutting off contacts with Europe. but on controlling an alternative com­
modity for which Europe offered a market-palm oil. In the late eigh­
teenth century. however, neither Dahomeans nor Europeans appeared to 
be thinking of alternative trades. Norris notes that there were a good 
many oil palms in the vicinity of Allada and that "large quantities" of oil 
were exported for use in British wool processing and soap manufactur­
ing. Chenevert and Bulet devote some comments to the processing of 
palm oil. However. neither suggests that oil might become an important 
product in the export trade. Indeed, the Frenchmen discuss instead the 
trade possibilities for Dahomean textiles made of raffia and cotton. The 
raffia was used in Europe for women's summer underskirts and the cot­
ton for tablecloths and bedspreads. Both raffia and cotton textiles, how­
ever, were contraband materials in prerevolutionary France.12 
The Military in the Late Eighteenth Century  
Dahomey expanded through war, and the fruits of conquest were hu­
man. Conquered people enhanced the king's and the kingdom's wealth. 
With conquered people came control over the land that they occupied 
and the vodun who owned and protected it. Defeated villages and towns 
could become permanently subordinant to the monarchy, available to be 
granted as gifts to high-ranking persons. They could be farmed indefi­
nitely for agricultural products, for manufactured goods like pottery or 
agricultural implements, and for labor power for the military and palace 
organizations. War victories brought the immediate reward of human 
heads and living captives who could be gratefully sacrificed to the royal 
ancestors. sold into the overseas slave trade. or absorbed into Dahomean 
households. In this sense, warfare was a basis for Dahomean prosperity. 
From early on, Dahomean military strength was feared by neighboring 
peoples and respected by Europeans at the coast. As early as 1733. for 
example, a European reported that the troops of Dahomey "have thrown

--- Page 147 ---
130 
The Struggle to Malmaln the State 
such terror into the spirits of al the blacks that the simple rumor of their 
approach makes people drop everything and flee." European traders ap­
peared to take to heart Bulfinch Lamb's praise of Agaja, the "greatest 
warrior in this Part of the World," who "in Time, will subdue most of the 
countries round him." 13 Following the 1729 killing of the English factor 
Testefol, who had openly assisted the Hweda and shown contempt for 
Dahomey, the directors of the trading forts at Whydah never openly 
supported the exiled Hweda in their quest to retake control of their 
kingdom. Rather, their "neutrality"-to the point of not cooperating 
with an occupation by the Hweda in 1743-was a tacit endorsement of 
Dahomean control and an effective support for the Dahomean armed 
forces. Nineteenth-century visitors and twentieth-century scholars have 
similarly expressed respect, and even admiration, for the Dahomean 
military. Robin Law goes so far as to argue that "Dahomey differed from 
its predecessors in being an essentially military state, whose institutions 
and ideology were permeated by a military ethos beyond anything which 
had existed in [AJlada or Whydahl. War was, in effect, the principal pur­
pose of the Dahomian state." lļ However, there are curious inconsisten­
cies in interpretations of Dahomey as a nation of unrelieved militarism. 
Europeans admired the army for its European-style discipline and its 
relatively modern arms. Locally. the legends of the Dahomean any con­
sistently stressed its invincibility. Yet the Dahomean armed forces were 
beaten ignominiously, and more than once, when they faced foes of 
roughly equal strength. For nearly one hundred years they remained 
subordinate to Oyo. being forced into humiliating retreats from Oyo cav­
alry and prevented from fully consolidating their control over their major 
conquests: Weme, Allada, and Wbydah. 
Why, then, did Dahomey have a reputation for military success? Why 
do so many scholars stress militarism in Dahomey? What was the key 
to the kingdom's victories, and why did military prowess seem to fail 
Dahomey so oddly and so often? I believe that Dahomey was neither a 
military state nor a state with warring as its raison d'etre. A military spirit 
was part of a larger pattern of ritual and political strategies to promote 
the well-being of the state. As in al other areas of cultural life, the 
Dahomeans freely adopted war technologies, particularly from Europe,

--- Page 148 ---
The Struggle to Maintain the State 
1 3 1  
and they incorporated new weaponry and other innovations. However, 
their military genius lay not in their borrowings from other cultures; 
rather it lay in their understanding and subversion of African rules of 
war. Throughout their history, the Dahomeans remained wedded to 
fighting strategies and tactics that were rooted in Gbe culture. They 
showed little or no interest in altering those fundamental approaches to 
war, but they were adept at modifying elements of Gbe warfare to give 
themselves advantages. 
The rules of war of the Slave Coast included shared beliefs about what 
behaviors and circumstances would lead to victory, and what natural and 
supernatural forces could protect individuals and communities from 
harm. In chapter 2, we looked at the myth of Na Geze and found two 
patterns that were believed to lead to victory: discovering the source of 
the strength of an enemy force and neutralizing it. and using a ruse to 
make an enemy vulnerable. Enemies' powers were said to be neutralized 
through the use of spies, known as agbajigbeto (agbaji == verandah. re§ 
ception room; gbeto = hunter-literally, hunters in the reception area). 
Agbajigbeto were sent to enemy territory to seek out the roots of enemy 
power and dismantle it. Created during the reign of Aga;a. they were 
regularly cited as a crucial element of Dahomean military strategy. 
There is an important contrast between the description of these Da¨ 
homean spies given by European primary sources, on the one hand, and 
that given by a major Dahomean source, Paul Haroume, on the other. 
Le Herisse explains that the agbajigbeto were sent in the guise of mer§ 
chants to live and make friends in enemy territory. even going so far as 
to swear oaths of loyalty to enemy individuals. They would study the 
roads of the area, learn the numbers of warriors and the habits of the 
people, and then return to Dahomey to convey al of this strategic infor­
mation to the king. Herskovits echoes Le Herisse's description. saying 
that the royal spies "brought back information concerning the nature of 
the terrain, the number of people to be encountered and. if pOSSible, 
something of the defensive tactics of the enemy." Hazoume, in contrast, 
records oral descriptions that stress two other points. First, they speak 
of the strength of the oath sworn between the spies and a representative 
of the Dahomean monarchy: the targeted territories were the places of

--- Page 149 ---
132 
The Struggle to Maintain the State 
origin of the spies, the home towns where "they had passed a good part 
of their lives," but where they arrived as strangers who were not even 
recognized by family and former neighbors; in effect, Hazoume's oral 
traditions stress the strength of an oath that cemented loyalty to Daho­
mey; the spies were so changed by the oath, so far removed from older 
ties of kin and place, that no one at home could recognize them. Second, 
the oral traditions that Hazoume records emphasize the actions taken by 
spies to destroy the power of protective gods and other forces. Then, "the 
victory of the Dahomeans no longer depended upon the bravery of the 
army, for the god no longer protected the city." Spies, say Hazoume's 
traditions, would try to link themselves as "brothers" to the enemy 
through swearing oaths in order to learn the supernatural strengths of 
the town. Then, they would go out at night to bury charms that would 
bring discord among the enemy or generate calamities that would leave 
them weak and exhausted. They would feed the city's protector deities 
substances that were incompatible with their natures, unleashing divine 
anger that caused bloody internal battles and burned whole sections of 
town. They would also-and this is clearly secondary-note the loca­
tions of the households of kings and important leaders, the placement of 
gates to the city, the organization of the enemy army, and they would 
draw a map.15 
Spies were not the only means to rework the balance of power to Da­
homey's favor. In the eighteenth century, there is also evidence that ritu­
als, and particularly divination, were used to guide military decision 
making. Following indecisive warfare over Whrdah beach in the 1740S, 
for example, the Dahomeans withdrew closer to Whydah town on the 
advice of priests who had divined the reasons for their inability to control 
the beach. In 1784, the gau, commander in chief of the army, left his forces 
encamped near Badagry to go "a considerable way down the river" for 
three days to perform ceremonies.16 The spies, the divination, and the 
ceremonies were al directed to the same goal: to know the sources of 
power of the enemy and to make it ineffective. The Dahomeans, and 
doubtless other Gbe-speaking states, would have worked always to reas­
sure soldiers going to war that the power of the enemy had already been 
destroyed.

--- Page 150 ---
The Struggle to Maintain the State 
133 
Stories about ruses appear frequently in accounts of war on the Slave 
Coast. They take several forms. In one, an enemy is lured into compla­
cency by alcohol or other distractions. An account of the first war be­
tween Dahomey and Oyo, for example, claims that the Dahomeans re­
treated leaving "Liquor as Bait for the Enemy," and returned later to rout 
the drunken horsemen. A less common ruse pattern to luU enemies into 
complacency involved breaking negotiated arrangements with enemies. 
In 1778, the Dahomean army was lured into a swampy area and attacked 
by a much smaller force from Epe (a port southwest of Porto Novo). 
Surrounded, the Dahomeans offered to resolve the situation through 
single combat, but when their champion was killed, they attacked the Epe 
army and defeated it.17 
Another very common form of ruse story tends to be taken literally by 
scholars. It claims that the Dahomeans would march away from the target 
they intended to attack, and then would turn back and strike. Dalzel, for 
example, says that in 1789 the Dahomeans announced that they would 
attack the Popos to the southwest, when in fact they intended to move 
on Ketu to the northeast. Whether or not either kind of ruse story ever 
described actual events is questionable, and in a sense irrelevant. When 
the Dahomeans arrived at the gates ofKetu in 1789, for example. the Ketu 
were securely behind their wals, daring the Dahomeans to come through 
the gate. Nevertheless, the Dahomeans won through a ruse. feigning re­
treat and drawing the Ketu outside. All of the ruse stories establish the 
same principle: that a successful army attacks unexpectedly. As such, they 
underline beliefs about what kinds of military behaviors lead to victory. 
In fact. Dahomean forces regularly tried to attack by surprise, and they 
were at times surprised by others.18 
Both Europeans and Africans-with the obvious exception ofOyo­
believed in the invulnerability of the Dahomean forces; or at least they 
behaved as if they did. Pommegorge writes of Dahomean indomitability 
despite evidence to the contrary, including his own knowledge that Da­
homey paid tribute each year to Oyo to avoid being attacked. He asserts 
that the army had never been defeated in war or even beaten in battle. 
adding that the army "is viewed by neighboring peoples as invincible. it 
makes al those who have to defend themselves tremble; they even claim

--- Page 151 ---
J 34 
The Struggfe to Maintain the Stare 
that if this army were defeated, if only one person remained to come 
with the news, he would have his head cut off on the spot. If this law is 
barbarous and worthy of the sovereign who made it, it certainly main­
tains the spirit of bravery of this army, and spreads terror among the 
neighbors that the Dahomeans ceaselessly pillage; but since they are not 
able always to succeed, the king is obliged to pillage or steal from his own 
subjects." Pommegorge, then, acknowledges the mixed successes of the 
Dahomean armed forces, even as he insists that they are without equal. 
Indeed, soldiers did often act as if they dared not return defeated; we 
know, however, that they sometimes were beaten and that defeated Da­
homean soldiers lived to fight other wars. Such traditions would have 
been reinforced by stories like the one Norris relates of a 1753 incident 
when a Dahomean army was destroyed at the coast. The twenty-four 
survivors sent back to tell the tale were sacrificed by Tegbesu to tell their 
comrades how much they had angered their king. Similarly, there is evi­
dence of a tradition of suicide by army leaders who failed in battle. And 
European descriptions of warfare, most of which were told to them 
secondhand by Africans, consistently note a reckless daring and obstinate 
persistence in the behavior of Dahomean soldiers. "Fear," Robert Norris 
says, "never enters into the mind of a Dahoman; cowardice is no part of 
his composition." 19 
Images of Dahomean military power were consciously and consis­
tently nurtured by war songs and belligerent public boasting and under­
lined by the thousands of skulls that decorated the palace walls in the 
eighteenth century, Parades of armed forces were a central element of 
Customs and a regular event of life at court. We do not know precisely 
how parade maneuvers affected enemy perceptions of Dahomey, but they 
certainly made strong impressions on European visitors, who often ex­
pressed their admiration in proportion to the degree to which the army 
approached European military norms. Snelgrave, for example, notes that 
the soldiers marched "in a much more regular Order than I had ever seen 
before [in Africa]" and that they were organized into companies with 
"their proper Colours, and Officers." By the late eighteenth century, 
\o\TOmen soldiers were included in these displays, prompting Dalzel to ob­
serve that "the singularity of this institution never fails to attract the par-

--- Page 152 ---
The Struggle to Maintain the State 
135 
ticular attention of the Europeans, when . . .  they are presented with the 
unusual spectacle of a review of female troops." Pommegorge counts four 
or five distinct corps of women, probably representing guard companies 
for past kings, each of which included from twenty-four to one hundred 
young women, whose ages he estimates at no more than sixteen to sev­
enteen years of age. Noting that their leaders had the same titles as the 
male war leaders, he reports that the women soldiers were "each one 
well armed with a small musketoon and a small short sword for which the 
scabbard is ordinarily of crimson velvet; their only clothing is a little wrap­
per of silk around the hips, which comes down to their knees. Thus armed 
and with two or three flags of silk, these women with their commanders 
march slowly in rows of four each." Women armed with muskets had first 
been seen by Europeans in 1727. They represented a Dahomean innova­
tion on an old principle of warfare, that everyone in a community would 
be called out to fight in time of war. Yet the parades of armed women at 
court projected an image of Dahomey as dramatically different, as break­
ing from tradition, as building a military that was beyond imagination­
and beyond defeat.©o 
Like the armies of other states in the area, the Dahomeans engaged in 
two kinds of warfare: direct attacks against entire villages or towns on the 
one hand, and fights against armed forces representing other states on 
the other. Early accounts of warfare along the Slave Coast suggest that 
the resources of an entire attacked community would be mustered to 
defend it. Ritual powers and protections-deities and war charms­
were kept "well-fed" and were invoked to protect the community. Men, 
women, and probably older children used whatever arms were avail­
able-machetes, clubs, spears, hoes-to fight against attackers. Armies 
that went off to fight on behalf of a state also appear to have included 
large proportions of communities. Sources often claim that the entire 
population, or at the very least all the adult males, would go to war.21 
Their described numbers were extraordinarily, even unbelievably, large. 
Europeans recorded estimates of armies, most of which they never saw, 
that for Whydah alone ranged from twenty thousand to two-hundred 
thousand in the late seventeenth to early eighteenth centuries. Bulfinch 
Lamb claimed that Agaja could field a force of five-hundred thousand

--- Page 153 ---
J 36 
The Struggle to Maintain the State 
men in the mid-1720S.12 Tegbesu supposedly sent fifty thousand men to 
relieve the occupation of Whydah in 1743. Casualty rates are similarly 
enormous: Allada was said to have lost fifty thousand persons when at­
tacked and defeated by Dahomey. with an additional eight thousand 
captured. 
We have no way to judge the accuracy of these figures. What the ac­
counts imply. however, and what the African informants who provided 
these numbers probably meant, was that armies were ideally of an over­
whelming size. Moreover, the larger side would invariably be the victor. 
When two armies met, people asserted. the side that was smaller and 
hence weaker would retreat or flee. Describing warfare in the kingdom of 
Whydah, Marchais additionally says that two armies that were of a similar 
size would not engage. but wait for a future moment of less equal odds. 
Presumably reflecting accounts from Dahomeans, Norris's descriptions 
of war consistently stress the idea that the larger force wil win. The Da­
homeans successfuly beseiged a Mahi stronghold because of "the bravery 
of the Dahomans, and their superior numbers." An invading force from 
Oyo that defeated the Dahomeans was "an irresistible army . . .  advancing 
with an incredible multitude." In 1743 at Whydah, the Dahomeans were 
beaten because they were "destitute of leaders, and overpowered by 
numbers."2l 
Snelgrave provides a specific example of action taken on the principle 
that larger armies by definition dominate the field. The setting was the 
retaking of Whydah by an alliance of the Hweda in league with neigh­
boring Popo forces in late 1729. Since Agaja was unable to match the 
invading force with an army of male soldiers of greater size, "he ordered 
a great number of Women to be armed like Soldiers, and appointed Of­
ficers to each Company, with Colours, Drums and Umbrellas . . . .  Then 
ordering the Army to march, the Women Soldiers were placed in the 
Rear, to prevent Discovery." The two armies met and the combined 
Hweda-Popo force, "much surprized to see such Numbers of Dahome 
Soldiers," divided over whether to fight or run, In the end, they did both, 
and lost.z4 
Snelgrave's is the first European record of the use ofDahomean women 
in offensive warfare, and his account has been used both to prove and to

--- Page 154 ---
The Struggle to Maintain the State 
I J 7 
disprove the claim that a standing army of women existed in Dahomey in 
the eighteenth century. Helene d'Almeida-Topor, who has written a book­
length study of Dahomey's women soldiers. sees Snelgrave's account as 
confirmation of some oral traditions that claim regular female troops ex­
isted prior to the nineteenth century. Law. on the other hand, maintains 
that because Snelgrave says that the women were enlisted only because the 
Dahomean army was short of regular soldiers, "the female forces were a 
form of bluff rather than a serious reinforcement." Since armed women 
were already being used by Agaja as a personal guard. it seems reasonable 
to suppose that he would have used this force, and possibly other women 
from his entourage, to enlarge Dahomean army numbers when needed. 
The idea would have been in keeping with the principle that an entire 
population, male and female, would fight to defend its home. In the case 
of Agaja, however, this was an attacking rather than a defensive force. 
and in that difference lay a significant departure from the usual practice 
of war in the area.2S 
An incident that occurred fifty years later repeated the pattern. but in 
this case the despatching of the king's female bodyguard to war was part 
of a response based on the principle that an entire community responds 
to atack. When Oyo in 1781 demanded extra numbers of women as part 
of the Dahomean tribute, Kpengla sent his army to capture women in 
the neighboring area of Agoonah. The force being badly beaten, Dalzel 
writes. and the news 
being brought to the King ofDahomy at mid-day, he immediatelygot 
up. girt on his cartouch-box. shouldered his fuelock, and marched 
towards Agoonah, at the head of eight hundred armed women. 
The whole country was in motion, men, women, and children. 
The King's big mother, who never dies, though she is sometimes 
put to death. fell down lifeless. before she got a league from Calmina 
[Canal: many were trodden to death, and not a few expired from 
excessive fatigue, and the extreme heat of a vertical sun. 
The eight hundred women would have been the palace guard. and "the 
King's hig mother" was obviously the kpojito. The principle is dear. 
Kpengla was interpreting the defeat of his forces as an attack on Dahomey

--- Page 155 ---
138 
The Struggle to Maintain the State 
7. Armed Women with 'he King at their head, going to War, from Archihald Dalzel, The 
History of Dahomy (London, 1793) 
and was literally calling upon the entire community to defend the nation. 
However, this force, rather than simply defending a homeland from at­
tack, went on the offensive. The principle that everyone respond was in­
voked, but defense was defined as a retaliatory attack. A5 in the case of 
the Hweda and Popo, the law of overwhelming numbers worked, because 
"on the approach of this uncommon army, the people fled."26 
These two accounts are the only evidence found yet in European rec­
ords of Dahomean women being used for offensive warfare outside the 
palace in the eighteenth century. European documents assert that women 
within the palace organization were armed and trained for fighting and 
that their organization and leadership para11eled that of the male military. 
Whether or not they were a regular part of the armed forces on cam­
paign. however. is not dear. Later, in the nineteenth century, we know

--- Page 156 ---
The Struggle to Maintain the State 
139 
that the comparable palace guard of women went to war, but was held in 
reserve while other forces, including female soldiers, attacked. In 1849, 
Frederick Forbes would be told that Kpengla had created the army 
of women; however, we have no confirming eyewitness accounts from 
eighteenth-century Europeans, who rarely saw the Dahomean army on 
campaign. They typically describe forces in terms of numbers of men, 
though the use of the term men would have been standard usage rather 
than a comment on gender based on actual observation. The oral tradi­
tions cited by d'Almeida-Topor purport to describe women soldiers at 
war in the early 1700s. They were collected in the 1970S in the Weme 
region by Amelie Degbelo, hut they are difficult to accept because they 
are not corroborated elsewhere and they were drawn from persons who 
were well versed in later myths about fighting women. An oral account 
given to me in 1972 by a descendant of Tegbesu fits the written evidence 
of women and men facing enemies together, but this, too, cannot be 
called conclusive. Tegbesu's descendant says that after Gezo took power, 
the women "were separated and no longer fought with the men," thus 
implying that in an earlier period women and men had fought together. 
In the absence of evidence that either proves or disproves the regular 
presence of female troops in the eighteenth century, we can only argue 
that it is clear that the idea of women fighting was very much a part of 
the Dahomean worldview, that trained military women were part of the 
palace organization, and that if a standing army of women did not exist 
in the eighteenth century, it was a very short step in the nineteenth to 
establish one.27 
Initially, Dahomean soldiers in the eighteenth century seem to have 
been recruited in the same manner as fighters in Allada and Whydah. De­
tachments of fighters were provided by officials and chiefs. They joined 
the king's troops to create a massed army led by a war chief or general ap­
pointed by the king. The king's troops in Dahomey, however, were more 
visibly a trained force-noted as such in the 17205 by Snelgrave and called 
a standing army by Dalzel late in the century. Chenevert and Bulet see 
Dahomean society as divided into three classes: militia, merchants, and 
laborers. The military class, they argue, earned their own keep when not 
at war-a subtle but telling distinction that contrasts with the idea of

--- Page 157 ---
140 
The Struggle to Maintain the State 
people occasionally being caled up from earning their own keep in order 
to make war. The Dahomean king appears to have provided arms and 
ammunition, which is less often noted in other states in the region. Nev· 
ertheless, it is hard to sustain the argument that Dahomey in the eigh. 
teenth century was a military state. Snelgrave suggests that the army was 
composed mainly of slaves. The gau, or commander in chief, was oruy 
one of five ministers of state and was not the most important of them. 
Military service was not a prerequisite for ministerial rank. The kings 
are sometimes described as going to war, but after the time of Agaja ac· 
counts argue that they normally remained behind their armies and did 
not lead them into battle. The Dahomeans. then, did not dramatically 
change the methods of mustering armies, but they appear to have made 
the king's own troops more professional, including giving them a sense 
of Dahomean invulnerability.28 
The principle that a larger force would always prevail was a central 
precept of warfare in the Gbe region. The Dahomeans appear to have 
believed it and practiced it whenever possible. Paradoxically, however, 
they were also not afraid to violate it, and are regularly recorded as hav· 
ing attacked, or resisted, forces that outnumbered them. Part of their 
myth of invulnerability, then, lay with this violation of the norms of 
war. For example, "though inferior in numbers," the Dahomeans stood 
against Oyo on one occasion. Dalzel recounts a story of the sogan sing1e· 
handedly resisting an attack by an enemy force that broke through the 
Dahomean front lines in 1775.19 One of the few detailed eyewitness ac­
counts of battle tells of the resistance of Dahomeans when the Hweda, 
allied with the Popo. attempted to retake Whydah in 1763. Written by 
Pommegorge, it tells of a surprise attack by eight thousand to nine thou­
sand Hweda and Popo that was met by a Dahomean force one-tenth the 
size. When half of the Dahomeans were cut down by the initial gun vol­
ley, Pommegorge himself gave the wounded refuge in the French fort, 
while the remainder stayed outside in the fort's protective ditch. The at­
tackers stopped, apparently to deliberate their next action, and in the 
interim a Dahomean war captain with thirty men led a sudden attack on 
the leaders of the enemy forces. Fighting with swords, they decapitated 
the commanding general and killed numbers of other high officers before

--- Page 158 ---
The Struggle to Maintain the State 
141 
being cut down themselves. The final scene, before the Hweda and Pope 
troops departed on hearing rumors of the approach of the regular Da­
homean army, was the request by the wounded yovogan that a gate of the 
fort be opened to allow a contingent of the Dahomeans to go on the 
attack.30 In short, the Dahomeans had a professional soldier's willingness 
to fight, if necessary, despite unfavorable odds. 
The Dahomeans in the eighteenth century appeared to embrace vari­
ous European concepts and components of warfare, as did many of their 
neighbors. A French clerk by the name of Etienne Gallot. who arrived in 
Whydah in 1725 and who claimed to have taught the Dahomeans how to 
dig trenches and build fortifications, was only the first of many foreign 
military advisers. As noted above, the Dahomeans formed their troops 
into organizational ranks and paraded with a discipline that traders as­
sociated with European armies, though they did not yet wear distinctive 
uniforms. Most importantly, the Dahomeans quickly and enthusiastically 
adopted firearms, even though the quality of imported arms was poor. 
However, European observers did not seem to notice that the Daho­
means were adapting the trappings of European warfare to an unchanged 
model of combat.3] 
Describing warfare on the coast in the 1720S, Marchais says that attacks 
were heralded by the overpowering noise of shouts, drums, gongs, and 
gunfire. There followed volleys of arrows, spears, and clubs, and then the 
real fighting, hand-to-hand combat with no quarter given. It was only 
when one side turned to flee that soldiers concentrated on capturing and 
securing prisoners. Once the chase for captives ended, the victors re­
turned to the battlefield, stripped the dead (and presumably the seriously 
wounded) of clothing and arms, and cut off their heads. The account is 
telling, Marchais arguing that the goal of war was taking captives. Guns 
for Marchais were part of the preliminaries. an element of the terrifying 
uproar designed to drive an enemy to flight. Victory required a dosing 
with the enemy and an ability to run down and physically restrain enemy 
soldiers. 
The use of guns by Dahomey became increasingly sophisticated and 
by midcentury guns were dearly an essential and deadly first thrust at 
enemy forces. Nevertheless, the capture of enemies and the collection of

--- Page 159 ---
142 
The Strugle 10 Maintain the State 
heads remained the central goal of war. Troops marched in order on 
parade, but an attack in the manner of eighteenth-century Europe, with 
long, orderly rows of infantry, was contrary to the point. Dahomeans 
wished to create a melee that would panic an enemy. Chenevert and 
Bulet, contemptuously describing Dahomean attacks, underscore the 
gulf between European and African concepts of attack: "The militia has 
neither discipline nor tactics, they go into fire like flocks of sheep; they 
only skirmish while making a dreadful din with ridiculous contorsions 
and frightful howls accompanied by drums. goat horns, whistles and 
gongs.")l 
The Dahomeans used firearms, but firearms did not prompt them to 
rethink their approach to war. Twenty-five cannon were brought to 
Abomey in the wake of the capture of A1lada. In the mid-1720S Agaja 
reportedly had them fired each market day (every fourth day), but they 
do not appear to have been used, for example, when the Dahomeans tried 
to defend Abomey against Oyo early in Tegbesu's reign.H The Dahomean 
response to cavalry was similar. In the history of warfare in Europe. foot 
soldiers in medieval times developed strategies for meeting and defeating 
horsemen; once firearms became available, reasonably well-disciplined 
infantry could nearly always overcome cavalry. An account of the first 
meeting of Dahomean soldiers and Oyo cavalry says that initially the 
sound of firearms frightened the horses. However, when the engagement 
ended after four days. the Dahomeans were "still much afraid of a second 
Invasion, an Army of Horses being very terrible to them." 34 For the most 
part, the Dahomean army fled from Oyo cavalry. In effect. firearms did 
not prompt the Dahomeans to rethink how cavalry might be met or to 
rework the classic pattern of deafening attack, close combat, and the cap­
ture of prisoners. 
The Palace in the Late Eighteenth Century ,.::",. 
As Dahomey expanded. the palace became a principal vehicle for the 
centralization of the kingdom. It was enlarged by two means: by incor­
porating war captives and by drafting young women from Dahomean 
families. As such, the palace was a cross section of the peoples who made 
up Dahomey, and because most ahosi (king's wives) were permitted to 
keep in touch with their home areas and kinspeople, the palace func-

--- Page 160 ---
The Struggle to Maintain the State 
t 4 J 
tioned literally as a vehicle of political and social integration. It also 
proved to be an important avenue for the introduction of foreign cul­
tural innovations. The palace was already relatively large by 1724, when 
Bulfinch Lamb estimated its population at two thousand. Fifty years later, 
Norris claimed that it included three thousand to four thousand women. 
Like the kings of Dahomey, kings in neighboring states were known for 
having vast numbers of wives; scholars have even suggested that the inci­
dence of large polygynous institutions was characteristic of the Slave 
Coast.)5 However, the Dahomeans developed the king's household into an 
institution that went beyond the norms of the region and that ultimately 
used ahosi for a unique range of administrative and cultural activities­
economic, military, political, and religious. In Dahomey, women carried 
out functions that were performed elsewhere by eunuchs, male slaves, 
male members of palace associations, and male retainers selected from 
commoner lineages. Why were women used for responsibilities that were 
the purview of men in other African societies? I believe that the palace 
became a singular institution through the convergence of a number of 
social and demographic factors: gender variations in kinship and social 
structures, general population levels, gender patterns in the overseas slave 
trade, and women's demonstrated abilities. 
The palace was in one sense simply a polygynous household writ large. 
Fon culture was patrilineal and patrilocal. Marriages were alliances be­
tween lineages, not individuals, and the individuals who carried out the 
terms of those alliances, who represented their lineages in physical unions. 
did not in theory have the right to name their terms or their partners. Ide­
ally, bridewealth was paid by the lineage of the husband to the lineage 
of the wife, and certain services (brideservice) were performed for the 
woman's parents by the husband. Upon marriage, a woman moved into 
the compound of her husband's family. Her behavior and treatment there 
were central factors determining the nature and quality of future rela­
tions between the two lineages. Twentieth-century Dahomeans described 
an ideal marriage as one in which the wife moved at a very young age 
into the household of the lineage of her marriage, sometimes even before 
a specific partner had been chosen for her. She would then be trained by 
her husband's family and be given to a young man of the family when 
she reached an appropriate age.36 Because hierachies among wives were

--- Page 161 ---
144 
The Struggle to Maintain the State 
based on the date of arrival in a lineage. rather than on age, a woman 
married as a child had a greater possibility of enjoying the fruits of sen­
iority. If, for example, she was the first woman married to the person who 
later became head of the household, she would become head wife, with 
authority over al other wives. A1so, girls more often than boys were used 
as pawns. As such, they represented security for a debt and moved into 
the household of a lender; their work in that household was a form of 
interest. Later, if a pawn could not be redeemed, she became a wife in the 
lender's lineage. In short, girl-children in Fon culture were socialized to 
serve a lineage other than that of their birth. Women learned to divide 
their loyalties, remaining in touch with their own lineages, which had the 
responsibility of protecting their interests, and often moving back to 
their birth homes when they were beyond their child-rearing years. These 
principles made recruitment of women to the palace and to the service 
of the king a more attractive option than the recruitment of men. The 
use of the idiom of marriage to describe the links between the kings and 
their male retainers underscored the qualities of loyalty and service that 
the palace required. 
If the behavioral expectations that surrounded women's role in mar­
riage were a rationale for building the palace organization with women, 
an even more ideal recruit was a woman slave. Slaves by definition had 
no kinspeople and no lineages to protect them or to interfere with their 
master's demands. In theory, their loyalties were undivided. A woman 
slave thus represented the perfect ahosi-a person socialized to serve the 
lineage and who in addition lacked kin obligations and protections. 
Popular traditions argue that al of the kpojito of Dahomey, those women 
who epitomized the ideals of service and the rewards of success, had been 
slaves. In reality, one can argue that al the women within the palace, 
whether they originated in Dahomey, arrived as captives of war, or were 
persons sold or pawned into service, were in a sense slaves. The distinc­
tion between them and women married into other lineages lay in their 
lack of the right to terminate membership in the palace organization. 
Divorce was possible, and probably common, in Fon marriages. Assum­
ing that her lineage agreed with her position, a woman mistreated by her 
husband or his family might leave a bad marriage-and her lineage 
would not be required to return the bridewealth; a woman who found a

--- Page 162 ---
The Struggle to Maintain the State 
145 
man that she preferred to her husband could marry him, provided she 
replaced the original bridewealth with her own or her new spouse's re­
sources. However, a woman within the palace-whether slave or free­
could do neither. No one divorced the king. It is little wonder that 
twentieth-century Dahomeans typically spoke of al ahosi as slaves, and 
that travelers used terms like stolen and kidnaped in describing women's 
entry into the palace. There is no evidence that any woman in Dahomey 
ever became an ahosi willingly. Marchais claims that girls in Whydah 
sometimes jumped into wells rather than enter the palace of the king.l7 
The same story-with the same means of suicide-was told of the Da­
homey palace as late as the 1970s. 
Once inside the palace. however, most women appear to have accepted 
their situation. Neither fully slave nor fuUy free, ahosi were nevertheless 
part of a complex hierarchic organization in which some might achieve 
a good deal of material success and wield a great deal of power. An esprit, 
an elitism, a sense of participation at the pivot of power in the kingdom, 
seems to have pervaded the palace atmosphere. Women there had op­
portunities for gain-for material wealth, including control over many 
dependents, and for the exercise of power. Even legal slave status did not 
erase regional ties or cancel kinship for palace women. Traditions make 
clear that at least some slave women within the palace, and particularly 
those who were high in rank, maintained contact with the towns and 
villages of their birth. Some moved kinsmen to Abomey and established 
estates that they bequeathed to relatives in the lineages of their birth. 
Others, like the Kpojito Hwanjile, imported specific cultural traditions 
that included new gods. Some bore children and some of the children 
visited their mothers' home areas; some nineteenth-century princes, for 
example, learned to be diviners of Fa in the lineages of their Yoruba 
mothers. In sum, the legal status of ahosi was ambiguous. Sentenced to 
the palace for life. some clearly languished there as in a prison. However, 
many others found the palace a place of opportunity. Ambitious women 
may have found the exercise of power and the possibility of material gain 
a prime motivating force.l8 
The growth of the palace may also have been linked to serious de­
population of Gbe-speaking areas as a result of the slave trade; the popu­
lation of the region declined steadily from 1700 to 1850. Moreover, the

--- Page 163 ---
146 
The Struggle to Maintain the State 
demographics of the overseas slave trade, with male sLaves purchased 
in higher proportions than women, created a shortage of men. Pat rick 
Manning calculates an overall average sex ratio of seventy adult men for 
one hundred women in Gbe-speaking areas, a ratio that fell as low as 
from fifty to sixty-five men for one hundred women in areas where trad­
ing was concentrated. Wegbaja, Dahomey's first king, is credited with es­
tablishing a precept that no Dahomean could be sold out of the country, 
and Dahomeans were defined as any person born in Dahomey no matter 
what the legal status of either parent. Nevertheless, there were so few 
slaves available from outside the kingdom in the later years of Tegbesu's 
reign that the king was said to have allowed the seUing of Dahomeans, 
and presumably more men than women, which would have further ex­
acerbated the gender imbalance in Dahomey. Male slaves, obviously, were 
not available in large numbers to fill the ranks of the king's retainers. Such 
shortages of manpower-literally, man power-in the late eighteenth 
century would have proved an incentive to women's activities being 
enlarged.l':J 
The scarcity of male labor is perhaps reflected in patterns for the di­
vision of labor by sex in Fon society. Certain ritual and leadership posi­
tions required gender pairing. Institutions like lineages and congrega­
tions of vodun were headed by a man and a woman. Their functions were 
described as different yet complementary, which suggests a conception 
of functions appropriate to each gender. By the late eighteenth century, 
we begin to see evidence of a similar pairing in numerous offices of state. 
Productive work undertaken by individuals, however, was another mat­
ter. It is difficult to find occupations or tasks that were not done by 
women, either inside or outside the palace. Women tended and har­
vested crops, processed food and palm oil, brewed beer, traded, worked 
as porters, and made pots, baskets, and mats. They cooked, cleaned, and 
reared children. Women do not appear to have built houses, cleared land 
for farming, cut palm nuts, or worked at certain artisanal occupations 
such as smithing or woodcarving. Writing in the mid-nineteenth cen­
tury, W. Winwood Reade scornfully asserts that "in Africa the sphere of 
woman is slavery," yet sums up the broad range of Dahomean women's 
work with Victorian eloquence: "She is also employed in diplomatic

--- Page 164 ---
The Struggle to Maintain the Stare 
147 
missions and in commercial enterprise. She is shepherd. agriculturalist, 
warrior, trader, embassadress, and sometimes queen. In this practical 
country one meets with admirable illustrations of the axiom of Plato . . .  
that, 'So far as her nature is concerned, the woman is admissible to al 
pursuits as well as the man.'" 40 
Women's presumed malleability can be seen in the differentiation that 
Dahomeans made between the utility of female as opposed to male slaves. 
Young female captives were integrated into the palace organization and 
reared into service and loyalty to the king. The range of functions that 
they might perform as part of the palace was broad, including everything 
from military to medical services. There was no comparable institution 
for the socialization of those male captives who were not sold into the 
overseas trade. The royal farms during the eighteenth century were de­
scribed as being worked by women. Beginning with the reign ofTegbesu. 
a few male slaves were castrated each year to join the ranks of the eunuchs 
and to work as part of the palace. Yet the very practice of castration in 
itself makes a point-that male slaves had to be transformed into some­
thing other than "men" to be useful to the monarchy. The major use for 
young male captives was integration into the standing army of men. 
Snelgrave appears to be referring to male captives when he comments 
that "the King allowed every common Soldier a Boy at the publick 
charge, in order to be trained up in Hardships from their youth; and that 
the greatest part of the present Army consisted of Soldiers, bred up in 
this manner, and under this Establishment." 41 
Women in the palace initially were needed for performing the same 
kinds of services that they performed in common polygynous house­
holds; however. the scale of their work on behalf of the king went far 
beyond the common norm. There were thousands of people to be fed at 
the time of Customs, processions to be organized, and dances and songs 
to be rehearsed; there were enormous storage requirements to be met for 
the goods acquired through the overseas trade and for the provisions 
brought to the palace from throughout the kingdom; and, at least in the 
nineteenth century. census records were kept by the palace.42 There were 
royal palaces of the kings in Allada. Cana. Ajahome. and. by the nine­
teenth century, in Zagnanado. plus resting establishments along the route

--- Page 165 ---
148 
The Struggle to Maintain the Stare 
between Whydah and Abomey. All housed palace women and functioned 
as administrative centers. Over time, palace industries were founded, all 
of which were managed by women. In short, the process of the palace 
moving from the household of the king to a complex institution that 
supported the state and managed many of its functions was a gradual 
one, and was the product of Dahomean pragmatism. Men were relatively 
few, and they were socialized to promote the interests of their own kin. 
Women were more readily available. and they were socialized to serve 
persons other than their kinspeople. 
Even in popular thought, there was a sense of the value of a woman 
that pervades accounts of Fon culture. Like water on the Abomey plateau, 
women were described by men as scarce, and hence valuable com­
modities. Vincent Kinhwe. a guide to the Ahomey museum and lifelong 
student of Fon life. provided a popular etymology of the word for 
woman, gnonnu. "Gnon means 'to know' and nu means 'to drink'; thus 
gnonnu literaly means 'to know how to drink.' A woman, like water, is a 
precious commodity and men must know that they can't take too much 
of it. A man must not abuse a woman because a woman doesn't belong 
to him. Women are for everyone. If you take a wife today she's for you, 
but when you die she'll go to another. Use a woman with moderation. 
Know that you can't drink the ful bottle; you must conserve some of the 
contents." 43 
The idea of a scarcity of women, despite a gender imbalance in which 
women far outnumbered men, was not simply because their services were 
considered to be so vaJuable. Polygyny, at the level of the palace as well 
as of lesser officials, more than offset the numerical gender imbalance in 
the overall population. Polygyny denied women to lower-ranking and 
younger men and emphasized the power of the higher-ranking men 
and women who headed large polygynous households. Norris argues that 
not only did the king monopolize thousands of women but that his 
"principaJ men" had from one hundred to four hundred wives each; 
lower-ranking officials had from twelve to twenty each. Perhaps more 
telling than Norris's guesses at the numbers of dependents in the house­
holds of major officiaJs were policies that appear to have been designed 
to provide access to women, if for no more than sexual services, for those 
men who were otherwise outside the system.44

--- Page 166 ---
The Struggle to Malmaln the State 
149 
Prostitution was described in the kingdom of Whydah as early as the 
1690S. There, Bosman reports, special houses existed where women re­
ceived men for a set price of 3 cowries. He notes that " 'tis customary for 
some of the most considerable and rich Negroe ladies, when lying upon 
their Death-bed, to buy some foreign female slaves whom they donate to 
the Community for this use." Norris describes a system that is strikingly 
similar. though in Dahomey it was the king who provided the women 
who were literally sex slaves. In this case they were part of the palace 
organization, "ladies of pleasure, ordered to be such by royal authority." 
He says that "in every town there is a certain number of women, propor­
tioned to its size. who are to be obliging to every customer that offers: 
the price of their favors is regulated, and very moderate." Moderate is an 
understatement. In Bosman's day, when sex in Whydah cost 3 cowries, 
the price of a chicken was 96 cowries. In the 17l.OS, sex in Whydah cost 
5 cowries, and in the 1720S, chickens sold there for 160 cowries each. By 
the mid-nineteenth century, a royal prostitute's price was 20 cowries, 
when a chicken cost 280. The price of sex, in contrast to chickens, was set 
by the monarchy and not by market forces. Norris notes that royal pros­
titutes in the late eighteenth century in fact earned their livings through 
breeding chickens and brewing beer. He saw them at Customs, and says 
that they were paying a heavy tax to the king. The "tax" was probably 
simply the king's due, from which they would have subtracted their por­
tions, as was customary when an ahosi performed an economic service 
on behalf of the king.45 
The palace also made women available as wives for low-ranking men­
people whom Norris calls "the servants of chiefs." In the l77os, for a 
bridewealth payment to the palace of five heads of cowries (20,000 cow­
ries), a small fraction of the price for a woman slave. they received a 
woman as wife. These women would likely have been war captives rather 
than women drawn from the Dahomean population. Norris comments 
that "I have known the king's wives, who are the agents in this business, 
hand out in malicious sport, the man's mother to him, whom he must 
maintain afterwards; and wait, content, til his circumstances enable him 
to try his luck on some future occasion." Norris appears to have misun­
derstood, because "mother" in this context has to have meant an older 
woman, not a biological kinswoman. A man of low rank or a slave who

--- Page 167 ---
150 
The Struggle to Maintain the State 
won the release of his own mother from the palace would have been 
pleased. However, he would have been justifiably distressed to receive an 
older woman, a "mother," someone unable to provide either productive 
labor or the reproductive service of bearing children.46 
The existence of state-sponsored prostitution and of arrangements for 
acquiring wives is a commentary on power relations within the kingdom. 
Low-ranking men were deprived of access to resources, and specifically 
women, with which to build their lineages and their own positions in 
Dahomean society. The monarchy in a sense acknowledged the implicit 
threat of their powerlessness by providing sexual services and women at 
low cost. The Portuguese priest Pires, who visited Dahomey in 1797, pro­
vides an additional example of the monarchy responding to a population 
with few resources. He reports that when market sellers refused to sell 
tobacco in tiny quantities, the king arranged for its sale in quantities 
worth five cowries.41 
We have little information for the eighteenth centwy on the organi­
zation of the palace. Marchais claims that there were three classes of 
women within the palace of the kings ofWhydah: the youngest and pret­
tiest, the older women 110 longer able to "serve the pleasures of the 
prince," and the women brought into the palace as servants.4 The evi­
dence about Dahomey, even when the palace is first described, suggests 
more complicated arrangements that were not focused solely on the 
sexual and physical needs of the king. In polygynous households, the wife 
first married was normally considered the manager of al the wives who 
followed her and was responsible for maintaining order and seeing that 
household tasks were done. The story of the mother of Tegbesu's rival, 
who kept the keys to the royal storehouses, typifies that model, and the 
story of her fal makes the point that the Dahomey palace was not orga­
nized in the same maJUler as common households. Although sources at 
various times cite certain "favorites" of the king, there is no indication 
that any single woman stood at the apex of the palace organization; 
rather, several functional groupings of high-ranking women emerge. 
The kpojito represented a series of power centers separate from that of 
the palace organization yet housed within the palace walls. Each kpojito 
maintained her own court with her own retainers and slaves. Pires, who

--- Page 168 ---
The Struggle to Maintain the stare 
151 
was in Ahomey at the end of the reign of Agonglo in 1797, says that the 
most important woman within the palace was the naie dada, which from 
the context appears to be a reference to Agonglo's kpojito, Senume. Naie 
(naye) was an honorific applied to women within the palace; dada was 
an honorific for the king. The implied meaning of the term, then, is the 
woman king. This "woman king" is described as being the equivalent of 
the king, having among other powers the right to order capital punish­
ment.49 Nevertheless, the kpojito, if that was in fact the woman being 
described as naie dada, was not a wife of the king; she represented the 
generation of his mother and, as a parallel officer to the king, she would 
not have had administrative control over his dependents in the manner 
of a first wife. 
Descriptions of the palace in the eighteenth century also speak of mul­
tiple "favorites" of the kings. For example, six "favorites" of Tegbesu, 
each sheltered by an umbrella and followed by a train of seventy women 
retainers, paraded past Norris in 1772. It is tempting to link those six with 
the six women who were buried alive with Tegbesu in 1774. In a likely 
reference to the reign ofTegbesu, six was further cited by Chenevert and 
Bulet as the number of women whose sons were eligible for the throne. 
Keeping the women who were the biological mothers of potential kings 
as a separate group, highly honored yet required to die with the king, fits 
with other evidence for succession in Tegbesu's time.so However, neither 
Norris nor any other source links them, and we are thus left with intrigu­
ing but only circumstantial evidence. 
Another important grouping within the palace was that of the women 
named to offices parallel to those of leading male officials. By the end of 
the century, European travelers began to notice that each male office had 
a corresponding female office within the palace, a practice that began 
with Tegbesu.51 There are, then, several categories of women who dearly 
were high-ranking in the eighteenth century. No single simple hierarchy 
among them emerges from the sources. 
If the organizational structures remained obscure, the impact of palace 
women's participation in policy making and politics was evident. Com­
plaints about women are a measure of their effectiveness. At the begin­
ning of his reign (1789), Agonglo indirectly acknowledged women's skills

--- Page 169 ---
152 
The Struggfe to Maintain the State 
in assisting outsiders needing intercession at the level of the monarchy. 
He announced that "he had adopted Ahadee's [Tegbesu'sl principles 
of governing . . .  that he would hear no complaints but through his 
Caboceers; and threatened to punish with instant death. the least whisper 
to his women: a crime that had been too common in [his predecessor 
Kpengla's] time." Women within the palace organization intervened to 
assist those on the outside. providing information. mitigating punish­
ments, and improving chances for favorable responses to requests to the 
king. Pires notes that women were involved in commercial as well as 
political dealings. Though we can seldom distinguish the issues involved, 
we have examples of women's actions, many of which were in favor 
of relatives. We have already seen the example of Shampo, who fled 
Dahomey when his sister in the palace signaled danger. Dalzel describes 
a complicated instance of court intrigue that took place in 1775 when the 
meu sought vengeance on the yovogan for a family dispute and eventu­
ally had him disgraced and executed. Although several of the yovogan's 
subordinates were killed when they refused to turn against him, one, who 
had a sister in the palace, survived because of her intercession. 52 
Major policies were credited at times to the influence of women. 
Nearly thirty years of warfare with Mahi began, if Norris's account is to 
be believed, because a "favorite" wife of Tegbesu, who was herself Mahi, 
had convinced the king to create a kingship in Mahi country for her 
brother. The Mahi wars ended temporarily during the reign of Kpengla, 
when the kpojito was another Mahi woman, Chai. Dalzel believes that 
the Mahi sought peace and agreed to assist the Dahomeans on grounds 
that they were kin to Kpengla. During the reign of Kpengla, 150 men from 
the area of Cana were sold into the slave trade after being accused of 
being lovers of palace women; only later was it discovered that most were 
innocent. Women were also said to use their power against people they 
considered to be enemies. The Kpojito Hwanjile left as part of her legacy 
the adoption of crucifixion on large trees as a form of execution. First 
used against an Aja enemy of Hwanjile's, crucifixion became a ceremo­
nial tradition, with each succeeding king using it to execute at least one 
person.5' 
By the late eighteenth century, observers began to talk more frequently

--- Page 170 ---
The Struggle to Maintain the State 
153 
of political parties, or blocs. As in the case of the accession of Tegbesu, 
women were typically cited as central to these parties, which influenced 
politics through councils of state and were also involved in succession 
struggles. Pires was told that the most important voices in state delibera­
tions were those of the palace women, followed by the eunuchs. and then 
ministers such as the migan and meu. Political blocs. according to him, 
would be formed around a combination of women, eunuchs, and min­
isters. Decisions of the councils of state were said to be subject to inor­
dinate influence by palace women, who were believed to be able to even 
scores with anyone who disagreed with them. The transitions between 
kings, and the succession struggles that accompanied them, were key mo­
ments in the life of the kingdom-windows on the struggles of parties 
and factions to capture the monarchy.!>! 
Successions and Polit/callnstability ..c::". 
Norris visited Tegbesu in December 1773, five months before the king's 
death. Old and sick, Tegbesu received the European in his private court­
yard. Nords describes his sleeping area, a detached room whose floor was 
paved with the skulls of enemy kings and other important persons. He 
assumes that the king gained "the savage gratification of trampling on the 
heads of his enemies, when he pleased." Had he asked, Nords might also 
have been told of the immense power concentrated in that room and 
available to nurture and strengthen its occupant as he slept. J n any event, 
Tegbesu died as king, apparently of old age. None of his three immediate 
successors enjoyed that privilege, which was perhaps a testament to the 
growing political instability of Dahomey and the increasing inability of 
monarchies to maintain their followers and control rival interests.5 
There was a period of one to two years between the death of one king 
and the formal beginning of the reign of his successor. During that pe­
riod, several distinct processes were completed: (1) the dead king was 
buried after a brief period of mourning; (2) the contesting political 
coalitions fought through their differences until one was able to take and 
hold control; and (3) a long period of preparation culminated in Grand 
Customs, the final funeral of the preceding king and the formal instal­
lation of the new monarch. Eighteenth-century European accounts pro-

--- Page 171 ---
J 54 
The Struggle to Maintain the State 
vide some information on interregnums at Whydah but scant infor­
mation about the process in Dahomey. When Dahomean successions 
are described, it tends to be from long distance and specifically from 
Whydah, and writers appear to incorporate material from Whydah tradi­
tions with stories reported to them about Dahomey. Successive events 
are telescoped and condensed into narrow time frames, and the Euro­
pean sources sometimes contradict each other. On only one occasion­
the death of Agonglo in 1797-did a European in Abomey at the moment 
of the death of a Dahomean monarch record his observations. The ac­
count, by Vicente Ferreira Pires, is invaluable, though not without flaws. 
Pires had arrived on the coast less than a month before the death of the 
king and had been in Abomey fewer than ten days when Agonglo was 
assassinated. II with fever at key moments, Pires patched together his 
account from information he heard in the weeks afterwards. Most of his 
informants were outsiders to Abomey: Brazilian sailors captured in wars 
at the coast, mixed-race individuals who happened to be in Abomey, and 
Africans who may or may not have been Dahomeans. Nevertheless, ret­
rospective sources from the twentieth century confirm much of Pires's 
general information on royal deaths and bwials. 
The order of events of successions was not set. Evidence suggests 
strongly that the death of the king was kept secret as long as possible: the 
persons in attendance on the king would have tried to control the news 
in order to assure that a candidate of their choice took power. The new 
monarchy was sometimes in command by the time that word of the 
king's death was leaked; for example, the successors to Agaja and Tegbesu 
were in effective power by the time the kings' deaths became known. 
At least by the late eighteenth century, the migan was centrally involved 
at the death of a king. When a king was dearly il and dying, for example, 
he was in dose attendance. In the nineteenth century, the migan acted as 
regent during the period until a daim to the throne was acknowledged. 
Whether or not a successor was able to take control immediately, no one 
could openly say that the king had died. even when it became apparent 
outside the palace that something was terribly wrong. Rather, euphe­
misms were employed: zan ku, night has fallen, and Dada yi Allad4., the 
king has gone to Allada, were two of the more common ones. Describing

--- Page 172 ---
The Struggle to Maintain the Srare 
155 
Kpengla's death from the vantage point of the European trading forts, 
Dalzel speaks of a month-long absence of royal messengers arriving in 
Whydah, creating an eerie silence in which "every countenance betrayed 
a secret which the tongue durst not reveal." Then, says Dalzel, word came 
that Kpengla had died of smallpox. In 1797, Pires was told that Agonglo 
was il with smallpox. When a few days later a prince made an assault on 
the palace, it became clear to him that the king had died.  
The association of smallpox with the deaths of Dahomean kings tends 
to be taken literally by historians, who attribute it as a cause of death. 
Outbreaks of smallpox were common in the area, and at least three kings 
were reported to have had pockmarks on their faces. Smallpox was spe­
cifically associated with the death of three kings-Kpengla, Agonglo, and 
Gezo. However, it is not at all certain that any of these monarchs actually 
died of the disease. No epidemics of smallpox were reported at the time 
of any of their deaths. Kpengla and Gezo were both away at war just prior 
to their deaths. In the case of Gezo, there are credible traditions that claim 
that the king was killed early in 1858 on his way back from war. Moreover, 
Gezo was described by more than one visitor as pockmarked and hence 
possibly immune to smallpox. We also know that smallpox was not the 
cause of death of Agonglo. He was poisoned through a plot led by Dogan, 
one of his brothers, who conspired with a "black woman who was kin to 
the king" to kil Agonglo.57 
If, then, the disease of smallpox did not cause the demise ofDahomean 
monarchs, why was it named in conjunction with their deaths? Smallpox 
was associated with the popular vodun Sakpata or Sagbata, a name often 
translated from Fongbe into European languages as "smallpox." Sakpata 
in fact was a series of deities associated with the earth that were said to 
have been imported into Dahomey during the reign of Aga;a. Sakpata 
earth deities controlled the fertility of the soil, offering to those who re­
spected them the fullness of harvests, the fruit of the earth itself. Myths 
collected by Herskovits speak of Sakpata and Heviosso (the voclun asso­
ciated with thunder) as siblings who ranked highest among the "chil­
dren" or dependents of Mawu and Lisa. Sakpata controlled the earth and 
Heviosso fire and water, so the two were forced to cooperate to provide 
for humankind. Heviosso punished those who showed no respect by

--- Page 173 ---
156 
The Struggle to Maintain the State 
hurling thunderbolts; Sakpata punished by having the grains that people 
ate erupt on their skins in the form of rashes, the most dangerous of 
which was smallpox.  
The essence of both Sakpata and Heviosso was also known in Yoruba 
city-states. In Yorubaland, Heviosso, known there as Shango, came to be 
associated with kingly power in Oyo where the vodun effectively under­
girded royal authority. In Dahomey, it was Sakpata who was associated 
with kingly power. However, Sakpata did not complement the ruling dy­
nasty, but opposed it, mimicking the authority of the kings and express­
ing hostility toward the royal lineage. Because the vodun's name was 
dangerous to invoke, Sakpata was referred to as Ainon, owner of the 
earth, Aihosu, king of the earth. or even Ahosu, king. Like the king of 
Dahomey, Sakpata inflicted capital punishment -the king's penalty­
but in the form of smallpox. And like the Alladahonu rulers, Sakpata the 
earth king claimed the body and possessions of those people he had pun­
ished-the victims of smallpox. Herskovits claims that shrines to Sakpata 
were built outside of Abomey because "two kings cannot rule in the same 
city." 5Ļ 
Herskovits believes that the Dahomean kings were simply fearful of 
the disease of smallpox and for that reason opposed the gods associated 
with it. Yet the associations of Sakpata with claims to kingly status suggest 
something more-a challenge to the legitimacy of the dynasty. During 
the reign of Agaja, the Alladahonu had been challenged by the ritual au­
thority vested in the "owners of the earth," the lineage acknowledged as 
the first-arrived on the land and that held a sacred covenant with the 
earth. The royal lineage effectively co-opted these owners of the earth, 
bringing them into the monarchy through making one of their members, 
Dakodonu, the fictive father of the dynasty, and through permanently 
empowering one of their line through the office of the agasunon. Nev­
ertheless, opposition to the ruling dynasty continued into the reign of 
Tegbesu. There it was checked through Hwanjile's establishment of a new 
order of vodun. In the reigns that followed Tegbesu. voices of popular 
opposition appear to have coalesced around Sakpata, the earth itself, 
where they continued to echo the old question of legitimacy. 
Did Sakpata, then, represent literally a form of political opposition?

--- Page 174 ---
The Struggle to Maintain the State 
157 
Did opponents of the Alladahonu organize through the congregations of 
vodun, and were kings killed by priests of Sakpata, as some have claimed? 
Did the followers of Sakpata spread smallpox to gain political advan· 
tage? There is some evidence that variolation -inoculation through de· 
liberate infection with the live virus-was practiced through Sakpata 
worship, probably most often on the sakpatasi, or adepts of the vodun. 
There is no evidence, however, that attempts were made by Sakpata 
priests to protect the general population through variolation or, more to 
the point, to spread the disease for political endsf>!) 
By the end of the eighteenth century, the royal dynasty was far beyond 
being easily dislodged. Struggles occurred within it, but it was never se· 
riously threatened from outside. Its own position and its own conception 
of its power were expressed through the growing importance that it 
placed on the tohosu, the monstrous and dangerous royal spirit children 
headed by the tohosu child of Akaba, Zumadunu. By the nineteenth cen· 
tury, it is clear that Sakpata had come to represent one of the few voices 
of opposition to the monarchy, and there is evidence of attempts to con· 
trol if not suppress its worship. Le Herissewas told at the turn of the twen· 
tieth century that the cult of Sakpata was formally outlawed during the 
reigns of Gezo and Glele, and women who had been pledged to Sakpata 
were not taken as members of the palace organization. A contradictory 
story was collected by Pierre Verger, whose oral history claims that the 
priests of Sakpata became very important in Dahomey during Agonglo's 
reign because of a major smallpox epidemic; in response, Adandozan 
drove them away from Dahomey when he took power in 1797. Gezo later 
bringing the vodun back to Abomey. Verger recorded a series of songs 
supposedly sung on Sakpata's return. The singers were priests possessed 
respectively by Da Zodji, a Sakpata deity, and by Zumadunu, the chiefof 
the tohosu. Whether the song texts express a historical event is unknown; 
however, they convey Dahomeans' perspectives on the ranking of the 
gods. In their dueling sentiments the voice of Sakpata prods and chal· 
lenges; Zumadunu insists on his primacy, his identity with the leopard of 
the royal family. In the end, Sakpata relents, "Zomadonu, no one can 
make war against you.» Like the disease with which it was associated, 
Sakpata was an irritant and a danger, a threat to the well· being of the

--- Page 175 ---
158 
The Struggle to Maintain the State 
kingdom, but neither Sakpata nor its ultimate sanction. smallpox, had 
the power to destroy the dynasty.61 
Smallpox. then, was a euphemism when used in conjunction with the 
king's health. To say that the king was suffering from smallpox was a way 
of invoking associations of challenge to the monarchy, of danger and dis­
order. In the cases of Kpengla, Agonglo, and Gem, it drew attention to 
deaths that were caused by malevolent forces. Shoponna, the deity of 
smallpox among the Yoruba, was associated with heat, and with destruc­
tive revelations that brought danger and death. As such, the god was con­
strained to live away from towns, in the deep forest, where its revelatory 
qualities could be controlled and concealed. In Dahomey, Sakpata simi­
larly was a vodun of the country, of the bush. Dancing and drumming­
activities associated with burials-were forbidden when Shoponna came 
to town, and when people died from smallpox. Saying that the king had 
smallpox was to warn of heat, confusion, and chaos. It announced the 
temporary loss of order and peace. As such, it paralleled processes de­
scribed by several observers ofWhydah prior to the Dahomean conquest. 
There, a kind of ritual anarchy at the death of a king was said to exist 
until the naming of his successor. Bosman wrote, "On occasion of the 
King's Death; which is no sooner publick1y known than every Person falls 
a stealing to as great a value of his Neighbour's Goods as he can possibly 
come at . . .  as tho' the Death of the King put an end to all manner of 
Reason and Justice." In the mid-1720S, another visitor to Whydah de­
scribed what might be called a liminal state in the period following the 
announcement of the death of the king, when order was temporarily 
suspended. 
Laws, the police, and justice seem to have died with the King. Those 
who have enemies use this period of time to get vengeance and 
commit all sorts of excesses . . . .  Everything is in terrible disorder, 
but this period of troubles lasts only five days from the time that the 
King has been declared dead. It takes five days to go get the Prince 
who wil fil the Throne and allow him to get possession of the Pal­
ace. They fire a number of cannon shots to warn the people that 
there is a King, and soon all disorder ceases, calm and good order

--- Page 176 ---
The Struggle to Maintain the stare 
J 59 
reappear; trade begins again. the markets open, and everyone goes 
about their business with the same peace and security as before.62 
In contrast to Whydah. both ritual disorder and real disorder were 
reported for Dahomey at the time of the death of the king. The ritual 
disorder was related to the burial of the king and was related to a three­
day suspension of normal daily activity; the real had to do with the 
struggles of competing factions to win the monarchy. When the king died 
outside the Abomey palace, which happened in the cases of both Kpengla 
and Agonglo, the body had to be returned for buriaL Pires says that 
Agonglo was moved in secret from Cana to Abomey on the night of 
Dogan's abortive attack. Once in the Abomey central palace, the body was 
washed. the hair shaved, and the nails clipped. Then the king was dressed 
as if alive. Agonglo's body was placed in a coffin, prepared long in ad­
vance, of clay moistened with the blood of human sacrifice. Located in 
an underground tomb reached by a narrow ramp, the coffin was sur­
rounded by foodstuffs, silk cloths, and rich furnishings of silver and gold. 
A living guard of eighty women and fifty men was sent into the tomb to 
accompany the king on his journey to the world of the dead and to serve 
him there. Pires remarks that the legs of the king's entourage were broken 
to keep the attendants from leaving. The entrance was not sealed for three 
days and during that period others were said to enter the tomb to accom­
pany the king on his journey to Kutome. Outside. the three days were 
days of formal mourning and suspended activity. when no one could 
wear new clothes, laugh, or show signs of pleasure. Pires's account of 
three days of cessation of everyday activity was echoed ninety years later, 
during the three-day period of public mourning for Glele. when it was 
similarly reported that no one could build a fire, go to market. draw wa­
ter, wash, eat, or sit on a chair. Everyone shaved his or her head and 
covered the forehead, shoulders. and chest with clay. It was only with the 
closing of the tomb that normal activities resumed.M 
The burial period might be preceded. interrupted. or followed by the 
active struggles of claimants to the throne. The three succession struggles 
-for Kpengla, Agonglo. and Adandozan-that followed Tegbesu's reign 
were among the bloodiest in the history of the kingdom. Tegbesu had

--- Page 177 ---
J 6D 
The Struggle to Maintain the State 
named an heir, a vidaho. early in his reign; nevertheless. there was a dis­
pute at his death. There are two historical controversies about the tran­
sition to Kpengla. The first has to do with whether Kpengla was the sole 
vidaho or heir apparent named; the second is whether Kpengla was the 
son or the brother of Tegbesu. European accounts contradict each other 
on the identity of the vidaho. The director of the French fort at Whydah 
claimed in 1774 that Kpengla was a son of Tegbesu and that he had heen 
named heir by 1751. However. Norris tells of a vidaho named Jupera who 
died while returning from warfare in Mahi country in 1764 or 1765, so 
there had to have been at least one change of vidaho. Norris met a vidaho, 
the future Kpengla. in 1772, two years before the death of Tegbesu. Yet 
another prince alleged to have heen vidaho was Ajokpalo, a senior son 
among the children ofTegbesu who continues through positional succes­
sion to be active in Abomey. Royal family members explain that Ajokpalo 
was vidaho. but that he was set aside because "his ideas were not good," 
and he was unbecomingly anxious to replace Tegbesu. Dunglas collected 
traditions that claim that Ajokpalo was deposed as vidaho, effectively for 
reasons of character: he was vain and arrogant. More, they charge that 
he was illegitimate. The proof for illegitimacy? The traditions claim that 
Tegbesu was impotent.64 
Impotence serves nicely not only to discredit Ajokpalo, but also to 
justify succession from brother to brother. We in fact have no direct evi­
dence that Kpengla was a brother rather than a son ofTegbesu; however, 
the actual kin relationship is of little importance, despite the emphasis 
placed on it by several historians.65 Indeed, brothers of deceased kings 
were named as competitors for the throne following the reigns of both 
Kpengla and Agonglo. What was significant for Kpengla was that he had 
the requisite support-an appropriately large party, or coalition-to 
win and consolidate power. Norris's report on this sucession seems to 
indicate a battle for control of the palace: "A horrid scene commences in 
the palace. the moment the king expires; which continues until Tamegah 
[migan] and Mayhou [meu] have announced that event to his successor, 
and til he takes possession of it: this he loses no time in doing, that he 
may put an end to the mischief going on there. The wives of the deceased 
begin, with breaking and destroying the furniture of the house, the gold

--- Page 178 ---
The Struggle to Maintain the State 
16 1 
and silver ornaments and utensils, the coral, and in short, every thing of 
value that belonged either to themselves, or to the late king, and then 
murder one another.66 By the time Kpengla's followers had overpowered 
those of Ajokpalo, 285 women were dead. Like Akaba's sister Hangbe 
some sixty years before, Ajokpalo had a large enough following so that 
he could not be executed. He continues to rank today second only to the 
vigan (chief of the children) ofTegbesu, even though Abomey is rife with 
stories of his bad character. 
There were four claimants to the throne when Kpengla died fifteen 
years later, two of whom were brothers of the king. Agonglo, a son, was 
the winner. Dalzel seems to make an odd distinction about events at the 
time of Kpengla's death-or he does not realize that his account is inter· 
naUy inconsistent. He reports that 595 women were killed in two and a 
half days within the palace and that Agonglo "rushed into the palace, and 
put a stop to the carnage among the women." On the other hand, he 
asserts that the migan had arranged a peaceful transition so "the struggle 
for the succession was not so violent as to occasion the loss of any lives." 
It is not at all clear what Dalzel believed was the meaning of nearly three 
days of killing among the female retainers of the king.67 
Pires's account of the succession following the death of Agonglo. which 
is virtually day by day, provides a sense of the complexity of the ritual 
and political drama that took place at royal transitions. There were two 
distinct battles within the palace. providing insights into who was in· 
volved in the strugg1es. and how. The first battle took place after the 
poisoning of Agonglo by a woman of the palace. Dogan had promised 
that, if the plot worked, "he would marry her and she would become 
Queen"-an apparent reference to the office of kpojito. In the small 
hours of the morning of May 1, 1797, Dogan and a party of three hundred 
armed retainers attacked the palace. Pires reports that the migan and meu 
were inside the palace, attending to the king's death. They had a warning 
gong sounded and distributed arms "to the king's family." Given the re­
strictions on access to the interior. "the king's family" must have been no 
more than the king's guard of women, a handful of male officials, and 
some siblings of the king. Dogan and his followers, caught between 
armed resistance in the palace and people arriving from the exterior,

--- Page 179 ---
J 62 
The Struggle to Maintain the State 
were defeated. Pires's account was later corroborated by the director of 
the French fort at Whydah, who implicated the Kpojito Hwanjile in the 
plot: the king "was assassinated . . .  by one of his wives, named Nai­
Ouangerie. who intended to promote one of her relatives." 68 
Dogan's abortive revolt was the initial engagement Later. a second fight 
occurred between two of the four sons of Agonglo who apparently were 
technically eligible to succeed. Pires was told that the elder of the four. 
Anibabel, had earlier been excluded from consideration because he had 
a deformed foot. a blemish that oral traditions claim was a hamer toe. 
The second, who became king as Adandozan, was vidaho. Adandozan was 
relatively young at the time. and he and his followers do not appear to have 
been fully prepared to seize power, because Pires's account implies that 
fighting and political maneuvering were being done on his behalf, possibly 
in part by persons associated with Agonglo. Perhaps it was Adandozan's 
youth that led Anibabel to make a move to win the throne. He and his fol­
lowers attacked the assembled court on the day of Agonglo's burial. Pires 
reports that four hundred of Anibabel's followers were captured and fifty 
other people died before the coup attempt was put down. In the after­
math. the remaining brothers of Adandozan, the two younger ones, were 
killed to prevent further uprisings and there was fairly widespread kill­
ing and imprisonment of suspected opposition members. Princesses of 
the royal line were apparently also implicated, because Pires describes the 
killing of women of the king's family. The royal women were tied up out 
of doors, fed salty food. and denied water until they expired. A total of 
nine hundred prisoners were taken by the victors in the two battles; some 
three hundred of them became slaves who were parceled out among the 
followers of the new king and another six hundred, including a woman 
named Agontime who would later become kpojito to Adandozan's suc­
cessor. were sent to Whydah to be sold into the overseas slave trade.69 
The ritual mourning and burial were thus intermixed with the on­
going struggles of candidates for the kingship. This blending of the reli­
gious and the political was reflected in the human sacrifices made at the 
time of burial. Traditions about who was buried with the king are highly 
contradictory. Dahomean sources insist that it was a great honor to ac­
company the king in death. Labarthe's 1803 synthesis of information

--- Page 180 ---
The Struggle to Maintain the State 
163 
about Dahomey is typical: "(AJ crowd of wives of the king comes for¢ 
ward to solicit the honor of being buried in the tomb in order to serve 
the dead king. They choose 24 of them; the women who are not called to 
take part in this barbaric ceremony sigh and complain about the injustice 
that they believe was done to them." Yet the legs of those so honored had 
to be broken to keep them in the tomb. In Whydah, the Chevalier des 
Marchais observed, women were tricked into entering the king's tomb, 
then trapped there and left to die, while male servants fled or hid, return­
ing only after they were sure that the tomb had been dosed. An earlier 
visitor to Whydah, Jean Barbot, commented that "at the moment of the 
death of kings al the courtiers can be heard expressing a wish to be able 
to die with him. But I am convinced that. in reality. they withdraw the 
offer as soon as they can." 
There seem to have been similar sentiments in Dahomey. Human sac­
rifice later would become a major issue in Dahomey's relations with Eu­
rope, and particularly with England. Travelers of the eighteenth century 
suggest that, in pragmatic Dahomey, a sufficiency of royal servants was 
a relatively small number, particularly when they had to be drawn from 
among palace inhabitants and other royal retainers in the capital. The 
aged Tegbesu. for example, instructed his survivors to send him only a 
few servants-his musicians and some other persons.1O The 285 women 
who in fact died in the fighting after Tegbesu's death were those buried 
with the king to serve as his entourage. Only the six additional women 
discussed above, the six "favorites" who may have been mothers of po­
tential heirs, augmented their ranks. At least some of the sacrificial re­
quirements at the death of the king, then, were conveniently filed by the 
losers in succession struggles. 
In addition to personal servants to the dead king, whose positions 
could have been filled by virtually anyone, there may have been specific of­
ficers required to die when the king died. A smattering of suggestions­
including Dalzel's ambiguous comment that the king's "Big Mother" was 
sometimes put to death-hint that. as in Oyo, there were some impor­
tant individuals who were expected to die with the king. Testimony from 
the late nineteenth century argues that individuals closest to the person 
of the king and those most trusted by him were required to die at his

--- Page 181 ---
164 
The Struggle to Maintain the State 
death. In a perverse way, the requirement to die with the king would have 
been a measure of an individual's influence with the king and possibly 
her or his power at court. With the greatest opportunities to inflict harm, 
those in the most intimate contact had every reason to keep the king in 
good health. Ellis names persons close to the king, including the kposi 
(literally, wife of the leopard), the women associated with the sacred to· 
tern of the dynasty. Skertchly reports that the male and female heads of 
the palace eunuchs normally died, though in the transition from Gezo to 
Glele, both remained alive. A mid-nineteenth century visitor was told 
that "before, it was the custom that when a king died, the cabeceers had 
to accompany him," a practice that was abolished by Gezo. Le Hªrisse 
claims that many persons would offer to be sacrificed but be refused by 
the new king. They would later claim that the king had "bought back their 
life," an idiom that perhaps expressed a sense of obligation and loyalty to 
the new king. Pires says that the entrance to the king's tomb was not 
sealed for three days so that in addition to those required to die with 
the king, men and women who wished to accompany him might enter. 
The open entrance left indeterminate the actual numbers, if any, of per· 
sons whose devotion led them willingly to join the king in death. It also 
made unchallengeable the belief that many volunteered to travel to the 
world of the dead with their sovereign.71 
Grand Customs, the final funeral of the dead king and the formal in· 
stallation of his successor, took place only after the new king was fully 
in place and opposition to the new monarchy had been crushed. De· 
scribed as a ceremonial cycle more elaborate than the annual honoring 
of the ancestral kings and kpojito, Grand Customs was always delayed 
until preparations were complete: quantities of trade goods acquired, sac· 
rificial victims captured, foodstuffs gathered and processed, and musi· 
cians and dancers trained. To some extent, the exterior relations of the 
kingdom would have had to have been relatively peaceful, because the 
cycle required the attention of the court over a prolonged period of time. 
One year seems to have been the minimum time for the consolidation of 
the new monarchy's position and the ceremonial preparations. Tegbesu, 
for example, died in May 1774 and the Grand Customs that confirmed 
Kpengla took place a year later, in June 1775. Kpengla died in April 1789.

--- Page 182 ---
The Struggle to Maintain the State 
1 65 
Nearly two years passed before the enstoolment ceremonies for Agonglo 
in January through March 1791. 
Pires describes one of the ceremonies associated with the installation 
of the new king, a process that he would not have seen but rather have 
been told about, presumably from the accounts of people who had wit­
nessed the installation of Agonglo six years before. The remains of the 
deceased king were exhumed. The king then appeared publicly holding 
the skull of his predecessor in his left hand and a ceremonial knife in 
his right, to demonstrate that he had been ruling in the name of his fa­
ther. Dropping the skull and machete, the new king took up his own 
sceptre, or rerode, indicating that henceforth he would be ruler in his own 
name. Later accounts note that kings typically proclaimed a personal 
praise-name, or "strong name," at the time of their installation. Given 
the severity and length of struggles between the various parties to succes­
sions, it is little wonder that most of these allegorical names refer to the 
obstacles that had stood in the way of the king, and to the special powers 
or characteristics of the man who had successfully overcome them. The 
strong names were said to have been sung daily around the palace and 
they ultimately became the personal names by which each king was re­
membered. Kpengla, for example, was associated with the phrase: sinme 
kpen gla ma dje avivo-the stone in the water does not fear the cold. 
Agaja's strong name was naki dja agadja, ma'gnon z6 d-one cannot 
put branches still on the tree in the fire. Once formally installed, the 
king reigned until his death. But even this rule of state was violated on 
one occasion in the history of Dahomey. The exception to the rule was 
Adandozan, who was deposed by supporters of Gezo. The deposition 
of Adandozan, rather than the chronology of passing years, marked the 
real beginning of the nineteenth century in Dahomey.72.-

--- Page 183 ---
5 
The Implications of Cultural 
and Commercial Change 
His Dahoman Majesty, King Gezo, is about forty-eight years of age, 
good-looking, . . .  his appearance commanding, and his countenance 
intellectual, though stern in the extreme. That he is proud there can be 
no doubt. for he treads the earth as if it were honoured by its burden. 
Frederick E. Forbes, l849 
• 
Gezo's Coup d'Etat  
The Portuguese priest Pires believed that Agongla was assassinated be­
cause he planned to be baptized and make Christianity the state religion. 
Pires and a second priest had come to Abomey, not because the king had 
requested religious instruction, hut in response to a Dahomean commer­
cial embassy despatched to Lisbon in 1795. The Dahomean ambassadors 
had been sent to request improvements in trade relations, including the 
granting of exclusive trading rights between Whydah and the Brazilian 
port of Bahia, and to complain of the poor administration of the director 
of the Portuguese fort in Whydah. & such, their mission followed in the 
steps of a similar embassy sent in 1750 during the reign ofTegbesu.1 
The heir to the Portuguese throne replied in a letter, and his devout 
mother, the reigning monarch. sent the two priests to try to convert 
Agonglo to Roman Catholicism. The priests had been received by the 
king a week before he died and he had indicated a willingness to be bap­
tized. We have no way of knowing if Agonglo in fact intended to be 
baptized. Perhaps more importantly. we have no way of knowing what 
he believed baptism meant. Similarly, we cannot know if Dogan, whose 
name was associated with the plot to kil Agonglo. was prompted to act 
by the possibility that the king would adopt Christianity. or whether 
166

--- Page 184 ---
The Implications of Cultural and Commercial Change 
167 
the assassination of Agonglo when Pires was present was simply a co· 
incidence. 
Pires's self· promoting account of Agonglo's great enthusiasm for Ca· 
tholicism is suspect. Nevertheless. there is a smattering of circumstantial 
evidence that suggests that the Christian god may have been a factor in 
Agonglo's demise. The god of Christianity was known within the palace 
by Agonglo's time, and the Dahomeans appear to have respected its 
power. It is also clear that they conceived of the Christian god as a deity 
that acted in ways comparable to any other vodun. Chenevert and Bulet, 
for example, comment that "in general, they respect each others fetishes 
[gods], and they have reverence for the ceremonies of the whites, that 
they also call our fetishes."2 
Ironically, given its exclusively male priesthood. the veneration of the 
god of Christianity was promoted in the palace of Dahomey by women, 
as was characteristic ofDahomean vodun. By the 1790S there were at least 
two women within the palace organization who were practicing Chris· 
tians. The first was an Afro·Dutch woman named Sophie, who had been 
married to the director of the French fort. Joseph Ollivier Montaguere, 
and who had borne him two sons before he returned to France. When 
European traders left Whydah, their estates were inherited by the king in 
the same way that the estates of other prominent Dahomeans passed 
through the hands of the monarchy on their death. As part of Ollivier's 
estate, Sophie had been brought to Abomey, where she was retained and 
made an ahosi by Kpengla. Subsequently inherited by Agonglo. with 
whom she had a third son, Sophie maintained a Roman Catholic shrine 
in the palace. The second woman, the wife of the interpreter who accom· 
panied the Dahomean embassy to Portugal, was residing during his ab· 
sence in the palace under the sponsorship of the woman that Pires calls 
the naie dada, who was probably Agonglo's kpojito, Senume. Pires re· 
counts two occasions when the interpreter's wife was believed to have 
successfully invoked the powers of the god of Christianity. Once, during 
a severe thunderstorm, she prayed until the storm abated. and Agonglo 
was said to have commented in response that "true witchcraft came from 
the white people." At another point, the naie dada appealed to the inter· 
preter's wife after having unsuccessfully consulted with "al" the vodun

--- Page 185 ---
168 
The Implications of Cultural and Commercial Chtmge 
priests to produce a suitable husband for her daughter. The woman gave 
the naie dada an image of Saint Anthony and told her to pray. On the 
following day, the king announced that arrangements had been made for 
the marriage of the daughter to a caboceer, and in gratitude the naie dada 
began to send money weekly to the chapel of the Portuguese fort in 
Whydah for the saying of masses. ĺ 
The respect enjoyed by the god of Christianity could easily have been 
interpreted as a threat by certain powerful persons in Abomey. The 
Kpojito Hwanjile was named as a principal in the plot against Agonglo. 
Hwanjile, as director of the shrines to Mawu and Lisa, the supreme crea­
tor deities of the Fon pantheon, was the earthly authority over al the 
vodun and their followers. In explaining their deity to Dahomeans, the 
Europeans typically stressed that their god also was a creator and su­
preme deity. As such, the Christian god was directly comparable to Mawu 
and Lisa. Capuchin missionaries in Allada in the mid-seventeenth cen­
tury, for example, used the name Lisa to translate God into Pongbe. By 
the nineteenth century, Mawu was the name commonly used. Was there 
some expectation, then, that Agonglo would install the Christian god as 
the paramount vodun of Dahomey, replacing Mawu and Lisa at the head 
of the Fon pantheon? Did Hwanjile and others anticipate that a Euro­
pean, or perhaps an Afro-European woman, would replace Hwanjile as 
director of religious life in the kingdom? 
We will never know with certainty if the perceived influence of the 
Christian deity was in fact a motive in the plot against Agonglo. However, 
the presence of two followers of the Christian god within the palace or­
ganization is indicative of the growth of a particular form of European 
cultural influence by the end of the eighteenth century. That cultural in­
fluence was sparked by European commercial visitors in residence along 
the coast. The European traders had had varying relationships of cor­
diality with Dahomeans and the monarchy. Individuals like the French­
men Pruneau de Pommegorge and Ollivier Montaguere, the Englishmen 
Archibald Dalzel and Lionel Abson. and the Portuguese Toao Basilio lived 
relatively long periods of time in Whydah. Several spoke Fongbe, married 
Dahomean women. fathered children, and functioned comfortably in 
Dahomean culture. Nevertheless, their sojourns were temporary; they

--- Page 186 ---
The Implications of Cultural and Commercial Change 
169 
lived within the confines of foreign enclaves, the European forts, as rep­
resentatives of European-based governments and trading companies. 
When their tours of duty ended, the families that they had established 
remained in Dahomey. 
By the turn of the nineteenth century, another community in Whydah 
was replacing in influence the European society spawned by the old Eu­
ropean forts. It was made up of a cultural and racial mix: descendants of 
the earlier European traders and their African wives, Africans who had 
had close relationships with the forts, and persons who had come to West 
Africa from Brazil and other Portuguese territories. The latter included 
West Africans who had been taken to Brazil as slaves and won their 
manumission, descendants of Brazilian slaves, and individuals of Euro­
pean extraction, many of whom were adventurers trying their luck at 
commerce in slaves. Settled along the coast from Little Popo (Anecho) to 
Lagos, these racially and culturally mixed communities became culture 
brokers between Africa and Europe. What they had in common was ex­
perience in the Western Hemisphere, the knowledge of European lan­
guages, and a particular affinity for Portuguese-Brazilian or lusophone 
culture. Portuguese was their acknowledged lingua franca and Roman 
Catholicism their religion. Dubbed the Aguda (A;uda) by the Daho­
means, from a probable Portuguese corruption of Hweda, members of 
this mixed lusophonic community were commonly called Brazilians by 
speakers of European languages, though we will here call them Afro­
Brazilians to stress their role as cultural and racial intermediaries. In ef­
fect, towns like Whydah became colonial enclaves, cultural outposts of 
Brazil that were informal colonies of a colony. 
Like expatriates in other settings, the Afro-Brazilians nurtured and 
preserved their lusophone culture. Some sent their children to be edu­
cated in Bahia; others cherished plans to return to Brazil, sometimes even 
as they lay on their deathbeds in Whydah. So predominant was the Bra­
zilian-Portuguese influence in Dahomey in the nineteenth century that 
families like the descendants ofOllivier changed their name to d'Oliveira. 
Yet the Afro-Brazilians differed from the older generations of European 
traders in their full acknowledgment of the Dahomean state as the civil 
authority over their lives. They participated on Dahomean terms in the

--- Page 187 ---
1 70 
The Implications of Cultural and Commercial Change 
life of the kingdom, developing links of friendship and marriage with 
members of the monarchy, and involving themselves in the kingdom's 
politics. At the same time, the Afro-Brazilians maintained their connec­
tions with European culture, and particularly the cultures of Brazil and 
Portugal. As mediators between and participants in both European and 
African cultures, the Afro-Brazilian community over the nineteenth cen­
tury was enormously influential, though never wholly united about its 
objectives, particularly as European interests toward the end of the cen­
tury turned to the creation of colonies on African soil. 
The spirit of the Afro-Brazilian community is perhaps best exempli­
fied by its most famous member, Francisco Feiix de Souza. Born of a 
Portuguese father and Native American mother, de Souza arrived on the 
West African coast about 1800. After failing in trade at Baclagry, he moved 
to Whydah, where he became bookkeeper and secretary to the Portu­
guese fort which at that period was commanded by his brother. Within a 
few years he had become an independent slave trader based at Little Popo. 
As his trading successes and wealth grew, de Souza eventually had com­
mercial dealings with Dahomey's King Adandozan, who at one point im­
prisoned him in Abomey. De Souza emerged from prison as a friend of 
Adandozan's brother Gakpe, the future Gezo.° 
Later, during Gezo's reign (1818-58), the friendship between the king 
and de Souza continued. Under the sobriquet of "the Chacha," he was 
appointed governor of Whydah by Gezo and wielded power that over­
shadowed that of the yovogan. Granted a large tract of land that became 
the "Brazilian" quarter of Whydah, de Souza and his polygynous house­
hold were the center of a community that grew substantially, particularly 
in the mid-1830S through immigration from Bahia. De Souza was de­
scribed by European visitors as being completely "Africanized"; never­
theless, he graciously received and charmed European visitors, briefing 
them on Dahomey and its mores. De Souza would discuss the pros and 
cons of the slave trade with missionaries and government representatives 
bent on its destruction. Meanwhile, he continued his own trade in slaves 
and maintained his control over the availability of slaves to other traders 
involved in the clandestine commerce. De Souza was very consciously a 
cultural intermediary, advising Europeans about the king and Dahomean

--- Page 188 ---
The Implications of Cultural and Commercial Change 
1 71 
politics and policies, and advising the monarchy about European inter­
ests. He is generally credited with encouraging the Dahomeans to de­
velop palm oil as an export crop. On his death in 1849, the chacha was 
replaced by a son. Though his descendants continued to be prominent 
in the politics of the kingdom and, later, the French colony of Dahomey, 
his successors never wielded power comparable to that of the dynasty 
founder.3 
De Souza's rise to prominence as an official of the king of Dahomey was 
directly related to his role in supporting the coup d'etat of Gezo against 
Adandozan. Little is known of the events leading up to Adandozan's fal. 
Even the date of the coup is uncertain; most authorities quote 1818, but it 
may have happened as early as 1817 or as late as 1820. Oral traditions are 
not helpful in providing motives. As in the cases of losers in succession 
struggles, they paint Adandozan with the brush of evil character. caling 
him a tyrant and despot who had usurped the stool from the rightful 
heir, Gezo. Many names of the putative members of the coalition that 
destooled Adandozan have been retained, both in oral traditions and in 
the accounts of later nineteenth-century visitors. De Souza's role was cen­
tral in setting the stage. Hazoume claims that during the time that the 
slave trader was imprisoned in Abomey, de Souza, Gezo, and a third 
member of the coastal trading community, Dosso-Yovo, swore an oath of 
friendship and vowed to destool Adando1.3n. According to d'Oliveira 
family traditions, Nicola d'Oliveira, the son of Sophie, was involved in 
freeing de Souza. Nicola was able to contact his mother, who was resident 
in the Abomey palace and who ultimately arranged de Sou1.3's escape. 
Gezo himself is credited with providing a sixty-person escort to help the 
Brazilian reach Little Popo safely. Upon regaining the coast, de Sou1.3 
sent the prince gifts-rum, tobacco, and cloth-and opened lucrative 
slave-trading links with Gezo. Gezo in turn built a following through the 
distribution of his profits from trading in slaves-trade goods and arms. 
Hazoume, in describing Gezo's growing entourage, provides a lively de­
scription of the process by which ambitious persons gained dependents 
in Dahomey. According to Hazoume, admirers of a new garment of one 
of Gem's people, a wrapper, were told, "I received this cloth from Gape 
(Gezo). You can have similar ones, our prince is so generous." Hazoume

--- Page 189 ---
1 72 
The Implications of Cultural and Commercial Change 
continues, "Soon Gape saw even his enemies come forward; all came to 
receive pretty cloth, to drink good rum, and to fil their pipes with to· 
bacco, things that one didn't get from Adandozan." 6 
Beyond the Afro·Brazilian community, Gezo was said to have been 
allied with a number of his brothers and sisters: the princes Tometin and 
Adukonu (both said to have been brothers by the same mother as Adan· 
dozan), Ganse, Atakin·So·Nou, Oundanoucou, Gnimavo, Atinkpasso, 
Linpehoun, and Toffa, among others, plus his sisters Sinkutin, Sav3, and 
Nagban. Dunglas indicates that several of Adandozan's ministers, in· 
cluding the migan, the meu, and the ajaho, were supporters of Gezo. A 
descendant of Dosso· Yovo included the names Binazon, Balm (possibly 
meaning Atindebaku, who was migan), Voglosu (Adandozan's meu), 
Adjehunou, Adjumanwessu, six hundred other followers, two hundred 
families of Bahia, and the kings of Savalou, Ketu, and Save It is unclear 
if the personal names given by Dosso· Yovo were members of the royal 
family, and it is difficult generally to judge the accuracy of these lists. 
Many of these individuals were later named to high office under Gezo, 
which gives their claims credibility; on the other hand, there is a tendency 
for people to wish to have their ancestral names associated with the win· 
ning side, which could account particularly for the "200 families of Ba· 
hia." What is notable about the lists of names of conspirators is that, apart 
from the role purportedly played by Sophie in freeing de Souza, no 
woman of the palace organization was remembered as having been part 
of the coalition. Palace women would be remembered, however, as hav· 
ing been involved in fighting at the time of the coup and particularly in 
providing opposition to the coalition around Gezo. 
Maurice Ahanhanzo GM:le, drawing on royal family traditions col· 
lected in the 1960S, provides a series of possible motives for the deposing 
of Adandozan. He says that Adandozan for economic reasons had failed 
to perform ceremonies in honor of the royal ancestors, and the royal 
family split over what to do about it. Meanwhile, the common people 
were transferring their allegiance from the Alladahonu dynasty to a corn· 
moner·chief named Josu, who was from Munyon, a village about four 
miles north of Abomey. Precipitating the coup was Adandozan's decision 
to sacrifice one of his own sisters, Sinkutin, as a messenger to the ances·

--- Page 190 ---
The Implications of Cultural and Commercial Change 
1 73 
tors. The king reasoned that if he wished to have someone plead his case 
before the ancestors. it would be beter to have a member of the royal 
family. someone who could recognize the ancestors and speak well on 
the king's behalf, rather than an anonymous prisoner of war. With the 
royal family aroused and divided against itself, civil war ensued within 
the palace: Adandozan was neutralized and Gezo became regent for 
Adandozan's son Dakpo. Gezo then tried to unite the royal family fac­
tions around the metaphor of a perforated pot. saying "in the time of our 
ancestors, Dahomey was like a normal pot and was able to contain and 
retain water. But now we, the descendants of Agonglo, by our quarrels 
and disputes have transformed it into a pot pierced with holes that is no 
longer able to hold water. If each one of us. with his and her fingers. 
comes to fil the holes of the pot, it will once again hold water and Da­
homey wil be saved." 8 
Dunglas provides a slightly different account but one not wholly in­
consistent with GleU¦'s version. In Dunglas, Josu of Munyon and Adan­
dozan were close friends. The king had given a daughter in marriage to 
the commoner and began to suggest that he would make Josu his heir. 
People began to gather around Josu and treat him like an important per­
sonage, which offended members of the royal family and high-ranking 
officials in Abomey and prompted them to act. 9 
Dunglas also provides a romantic description of the court scene as 
Adandozan was destooled: Adandozan and his assembled courtiers sud­
denly hear in the distance the solemn sounds of Dogba, the great war 
drum. Stunned, Adandozan looks to the spot where the sacred drum 
normally stands in close proximity to the king; it has disappeared. The 
slow rumble of Dogba draws nearer and the entire assembly sits. frozen 
into immobility. A royal procession enters the court with Gezo in the 
place of the king. Adandozan's migan. Atindebaku, his voice choking with 
emotion, announces, "Two suns cannot shine at the same time." He ap­
proaches Adandozan. removes the royal sandals, the sign of kingship, and 
declares, "You are no longer king. You can no longer occupy the seat of 
Wegbaja."1O The reality, including traditions recorded by this same 
Dunglas. appears to have been less gentle, as will be apparent below. 
There is evidence that the destooling of Adandozan was not sufficient

--- Page 191 ---
1 74 
The Implications of Cultural and Commercial Change 
to confirm Gezo in power and that at some point fighting broke out. 
Glele says that Gezo ruled as regent for Dakpo, the heir of Adandozan, for 
about twenty years. Then, when Gezo decided to name his own son as 
vidaho. Adandozan's son set the palace on fire and was killed. It was only 
then that Gezo fully assumed the role of king. In his novel Doguicimi, Paul 
Hazoume similarly speaks of a fire set by sons of Adandozan. In this 
account, the situation was saved by a wife of Gezo named YepommÅ 
Avognonde, whose shouts and firing of a gun alerted others of the at­
tack. Thomas Birch Freeman, who visited Abomey in the 1840S, was also 
told about a revolt within the palace some time after Adandozan had 
been removed from power, and Bernard Maupoil. in the 1930S, collected 
traditions telling of the burning of the palace by sons of Adandozan. 
Dunglas himself describes violence that took place after the destooling of 
Adandozan. He notes that several sons of Adandozan were executed "in 
the repression that followed" Gezo's coup, and that Adandozan's vidaho, 
Dakpo, was shot by Na Bekonsi, the na daho. who was a sister ofGezo and 
Adandozan. Dakpo's "mother," a woman narned Dohoue, is recalled 
through a song that describes her being dragged by the neck through the 
streets of Abomey, while people called out to cut her into pieces and burn 
her. Finally, Dunglas mentions in passing that a bodyguard of women was 
killed in its entirety in a section of the palace called Aligo when they at­
tempted. to resist Gezo's followers.ll 
We wil never know exactly what happened when Adandozan was de­
posed, but one thing is certain-and difficult to explain. The deposed 
king was allowed to live. Visitors in the mid-nineteenth century learned. 
what was an open secret around Abomey: that Adandozan remained alive 
in one of the palaces. Though one source reported that he died in the late 
1840S, more reliable ones indicate that Adandozan outlived Gezo himself, 
dying in the early 1860s. By that time, his surviving descendants and fol­
lowers, who resided in the 8econ-Hwegbo quarter of Abomey, no longer 
associated themselves with his name; rather, they were part of a grouping 
of royal descendants that included the children of Agonglo and that was 
called bahanyan, or disorder. Al the events of Adandozan's twenty-one 
year reign were completely ignored in the songs of the kpanligan, the 
court heralds and praise-singers. Thus Adandozan suffered a bizarre

--- Page 192 ---
The fmpllcatlons of Cultural and Commercial Change 
1 75 
punishment that was perhaps worse than assassination -to watch history 
be reworked as though he had never lived. 
Though we do not know what happened at the time of Gezo's acces­
sion, nor precisely why Adandozan was deposed. there are certain themes 
that emerge from the traditions about the coup and the changes made 
after it. First, most of the accounts point to a fundamental loss of support 
as a reason for Adandozan's fal. The de Souza traditions emphasize the 
size of Gezo's following in implicit contrast to a lesser number of depen­
dents for Adandozan. Glele argues that to continue to rule. the king had 
to retain the support of his followers and adhere to accepted rules of 
behavior for a Dahomean king: "the king thus has power, but he must 
respect the laws of the kingdom. Exclusive holder of all powers. he (the 
king} was not able to exercise them all alone; that is why he was assisted 
by numerous dignitaries who constituted. with him, the central power, 
and formed the territorial and provincial administration." 12 In short. 
Glete suggests that Adandozan tried to rule without a monarchy-with­
out the dependents and supporters who enhanced his power as they 
shared it. The traditions about de Souza clearly show Gew building and 
utilizing his followers, creating a coalition that at the appropriate mo­
ment became a monarchy. 
Second. the traditions about Josu of Munyon hint at tensions between 
royalty and commoner. Taken literally, the idea that a commoner from a 
village north of Abomey would aspire to replace a dynastic heir is absurd. 
What, then. are the royal oral records suggesting? They seem to speak of 
commoner arrogance. of the idea that a common man given privilege 
and wealth overreaches his limits. In earlier times, intimations of popular 
unrest were expressed in terms of religious friction. The Kpojito Hwan­
jile. for example. was said to have reordered the hierarchy of the gods the 
better to co-opt priestly leadership and control the followers of the 
"popular" vodun. The Josu of Munyon traditions are of a slightly differ­
ent nature, suggesting less general unrest among the people and more the 
dangers of permitting a person of nonroyal lineage to acquire too much 
power. In that sense. the Josu tradition rationalizes and justifies Gezo's 
appointment of members of the royal family to central positions in his 
monarchy.

--- Page 193 ---
1 76 
The Implications of Cultural and Commercial Change 
GleIe also mentions a third theme-a split in the royal family. with 
the deposition crisis precipitated by the king's decision to sacrifice his 
sister. In a sense, a split in the royal family was not extraordinary: there 
is abundant evidence for royal conflict earlier in the history of the dy­
nasty, particularly at moments of succession. The interesting point about 
this case is the resolution of the crisis, with the deposed king surviving. 
That resolution suggests two things: that the factions were balanced in 
terms of relative strength. and that the palace organization was effective 
in its protection of the person of the reigning monarch. Gezo's supporters 
dearly were unable to arrange to kil Adandozan. but at the same time 
the king's supporters were not strong enough to maintain him -in power. 
The fact of the survival of the king also provides evidence that Gezo may 
well have been appointed as regent, so that he initially reigned as a prince, 
not king-a distinction that would later be enshrined in ritual. Finally, 
the story of the threatened sacrifice of the king's sister may on the one 
hand be read as a myth justifying Adandozan's deposition by emphasiz­
ing his evil character. On the other hand, the idea of sacrificing a person 
of relatively great importance fit Dahomean concepts of sacrifice. As we 
shall see, similar thinking would inspire Behanzin to take the life of his 
own kpojito some seventy-five years later. 
Another important theme in Gezo's rise was the nature of his support. 
The composition of the coalition that brought Gezo to power marked a 
dramatic departure from previous succession struggles. The central mov­
ing forces were of two kinds: de Souza (and to a lesser extent the Afro­
Brazilian community); and the siblings of Gezo. The prominent role 
played by a major slave trader suggests economic motives as a factor, or 
at least that the commercial community hoped for improved trading 
opportunities with a new king. Along with the traditions about Josu of 
Munyon, the centrality of Gezo's siblings suggests a degree of class con­
flict, or more specificaly, continued rivalry between royalty and com­
moners. Tensions between royalty and commoners in the eighteenth 
century had been acknowledged and resolved through ritual accommo­
dations and institutional structures that included the office of kpojito. 
Male commoners, including several ministers of Adandozan, were said 
to have been involved in deposing Adandozan, but in roles that appear

--- Page 194 ---
The Implications of Cultural and Commercial Change 
177 
to have been secondary to those of the members of the royal family. 
Women commoners within the palace organization were notably absent 
as allies of Gezo, which suggests both that they were loyal to the ruling 
monarchy and that they may have been a crucial factor in Adandozan's 
physical survival. 
As noted above, de Souza was generously rewarded once Gezo came 
to power, and he continued throughout the remainder of his life to play 
the role of powerful confidant and adviser to the king. Though Europe­
ans and Airo-Europeans had been advisors and long-term visitors to the 
courts of the Dahomean kings in the past, none, prior to Gezo, was 
known to have been directly involved in a succession dispute. Siblings of 
would-be kings, on the other hand, had been involved in the past, and 
the siblings of Gezo who were involved in bringing him to power received 
rich rewards. Departing from previous practice, Gezo named them to 
ministerial and other high offices simultaneously with persons of com­
mon birth. Atindebaku, for example, the migan of Adandozan, contin­
ued as migan, but Ganse, Gem's brother, was also named to the position. 
Adandozan's meu, Voglosu, who along with Atindebaku was named as a 
conspirator, was meu under Gezo. But Tometin, Gezo's brother, was also 
meu. The greater role of persons of royal blood and specifically of siblings 
of the king in prominent positions in the kingdom became a character­
istic of the nineteenth-century state. 
Accounts of the organization of the state that are based on royal family 
perspectives after the fal of the kingdom stress that as a matter of prin­
ciple ministers and other high officials were always drawn from among 
common people. Le Herisse, for example, was told in the early 1900S that 
the kings never named members of their family to positions of respon­
sibility, but rather showered them with riches and kept them in the vi­
cinity of Abomey in a "domesticite doree," a gilded cage. Clearly follow­
ing royal family interpretations, Le Herisse insists that when in a few cases 
siblings of Gezo became ministers, such positions were simply honorific 
and the royal family members who held them were merely assistants to 
the major figures. Gleie similarly stresses the point that the kings, with a 
few exceptions, always chose ministers from among commoners, noting 
"when it happened that the king named princes as ministers, the true

--- Page 195 ---
J 78 
The Implications of Cultural and Commercial Change 
holder of the office was always the dignitary drawn from among the 
people. The anato (commoners), knowing that they owed everything to 
the king, remained loyal and very faithful to him; they succeeded through 
their zeal, their ardor in service to the king, to rise in society, to hold the 
highest responsibilities and to constitute a kind of nobility of function 
that was generally more natural than the princes who were kept away 
from power." The argument that members of the royal family were 
simply honorary ministers with no rea) role was not strictly true, even 
during the reign of Gezo. As late as the visit of Forbes in 1849, the com­
moner migan and meu were recognized as the officeholders, while Ganse 
and Tometin, the princely migan and meu, were listed simply as royal 
brothers. Nevertheless, we have evidence suggesting that Gezo's brothers 
played more than a nominal role. The commoner migan, Atindebaku, 
was despatched on a mission abroad that kept him out of Dahomey for a 
number of years, which presumably meant that Prince Ganse functioned 
as migan at the very least for that period of time. The greater closeness of 
siblings of the king to active participation in the monarchy foreshadowed 
changes to be made during the reign of Glele. \J 
After the destoolment of Adandozan, commoner women, too, within 
the palace began to experience changes. In the past and for the future, 
coalitions that reached for control over Dahomey included women of the 
palace organization. If any were involved in assisting the forces of Gezo, 
however, they were not acknowledged in the aftermath of the successful 
coup. Gezo's choice of a kpojito was indicative. In the past, kings had 
recognized the involvement of powerful women in succession struggles 
by naming them kpojito; although traditions about her are contradictory 
on important points, all agree that Gezo's kpojito, Agontime, was not 
directly involved in the events that made Gezo king. 
The Kpojito Agontime  
Agontime was a wife of AgongIo, having been brought to Abomey from 
Tend;i, a town about nine miles to the northeast, where her mother's 
family resided. Agontime is said to have been involved on the losing side 
in the succession struggle at the death of Agonglo in 1797, and she was

--- Page 196 ---
The Implications of Cultural and Commercial Change 
1 79 
one of the persons sold into the overseas trade in the aftermath. She is 
said to have been later brought back at Gezo's direction. What precisely 
was her relationship to Gezo? Most sources simply say that she was his 
"mother," an answer that, as we have seen, can be anthropologically cor­
rect but biologically misleading. D'Oliveira family traditions say that 
Agontime was a wet nurse to Gew, but we have no corroborating evi­
dence for any direct relationship between the twO.14 
People were occasionally redeemed from slavery in the Western Hemi­
sphere. A prince taken to Brazil during Tegbesu's reign. for example, was 
redeemed by Kpengla and competed against Agonglo for the royal stool. 
Gezo is known to have sent delegations to the Western Hemisphere, at least 
two of which are remembered as having been sent in search of Agontime; 
Dosso-Yovo and Migan Atindebaku led the searches. Traditions vary 
about the circumstances. Most versions agree that the Dahomean ambas­
sadors spent three years on the first trip; however. they disagree on the sites 
visited, naming variously Brazil, Cuba, or elsewhere in the Antiles. Most 
accounts of Agontime claim that she returned after the second trip, though 
two important authorities, Hazoume and GleIe, claim that she was never 
found. In any event, a kpojito was enstooled relatively early in Gezo's 
reign, possibly at the time of his own formal enstoolment. One source 
links her appearance in Abomey with a Dahomean victory over Oyo in 
1823; another claims that she spent twenty-four years in "Ame'ika," which 
would date a return to Dahomey to around 1821. She took the name 
Agontime from the praise-phraseAgossi yollO gboje agontime, which trans­
lated literally means, the monkey has come from the country of the whites 
and is now in a field of pineapples. Its meaning contrasts Agontime's de­
grading past with the riches of her present.lµ 
Pierre Verger has published an essay that hypothesizes that Agontime 
lived in the Western Hemisphere in Sao Luis de Maranhao in northeast­
ern Brazil. There, in a temple known locally as the House of the Minas 
(Mina being a term for coastal peoples in the area ofWhydah), a number 
of old Dahomean deities were honored in the twentieth century. Along 
with numerous popular vodun they included Nesuhwe, deified members 
of the royal family-but only royal individuals who had lived prior to

--- Page 197 ---
180 
The lmpl/carlons of Cultuml and Commercial Change 
the reign of Agonglo. Though he has no evidence that links her specifi­
cally with the site, Verger argues that it was Agontime who established 
the worship of these deities that are fixed in time by their association with 
the reigns before Agonglo. 16 
The image of Agontime as a powerful priest, skilled in the means to 
venerate the vodun, links her to the traditions of the great kpojito of the 
eighteenth century, Adonon and Hwan;ile. But while superficially resem­
bling that older model, Agontime does not approach it in fact. First, she 
is not remembered by her descendants as having been a priest. 17 In ad­
dition, she was not a member of the coalition that sought power in Gezo's 
name, and she was not highly visible, as were individuals like de Souza or 
Tometin, in the politics of the kingdom during his reign. Unlike Hwan­
jile, there are no traditions of activism in organizing religious life associ­
ated with Gezo's kpojito. 
The lack of agreement on whether or not Agontime really returned 
from the Western Hemisphere is teling, because in the political realities 
of Gezo's time, her return was irrelevant. She was fixed as a symbolic 
rather than real figure in Dahomean history. As an individual sold out of 
Dahomey at the time of Adandozan's succession, she was an emblem of 
opposition to the king who was later deposed by Gezo and his supporters. 
She can also be seen as a symbol of the interests of Gezo's monarchy in 
working closely with Brazilians to encourage overseas trade. The delega­
tions ostensibly sent to search for her in the Western Hemisphere appear 
to have had other, or at least additional, charges. A governor of the Por­
tuguese fort in Whydah in the late nineteenth century, who interviewed 
00550-Yovo when he was a very old man, claimed that the mission had 
been despatched as a formal diplomatic mission to meet with the Portu­
guese King Don Joao VI in Rio de Janeiro.ls Another informant, a direct 
descendant of Dosso-Yovo, testified in the 1970S that his ancestor had 
been involved in encouraging the migration of two hundred Bahian fami­
lies to Whydah.19 The search for Agontime, then. may be seen as part of 
the expression of interest by the Gezo monarchy in continuing contacts 
with the Western Hemisphere, and specifically with Brazil. 
Though Agontime was in several senses a symbol of the monarchy's

--- Page 198 ---
The Implications of Cultural and Commercial Change 
I B I 
interests and directions, she was nevertheless a real person with real 
family ties. One tradition claims that she was the younger sister of Ble, 
the man who founded the Yemadje lineage of applique makers to the 
kings. Immediately following Agontime's marriage to Agonglo, the king 
is said to have sent for Ble, marrying him as an ahosi, and setting him up 
in a workshop in Abomey with eight wives and eight young apprentices.20 
Significandy, these traditions about the family connections of the kpojito 
are a departure from earlier ones. In the cases of Adonon and Hwanjile, 
traditions show the kpo;ito promoting her own children to positions of 
prominence (Hwanjile) or responding to slights by her lineage by effec­
tive retribution (Adonon). In the case of Agontime and of the kpojito of 
Glele who followed her, traditions stress the importance of siblings and 
lineage connections, implying that those connections were what raised 
the women to importance in the first instance. Agontime, according to 
Verger's tradition, was a younger sister to an artisan who was very impor­
tant in the reign of Gezo. In similar fashion, Glele's kpojito was said to 
have been a younger sister to a chief diviner and advisor to Glele. The 
impression is given that the women were prominent at court because they 
were from important families, rather than suggesting the earlier pattern, 
that their families became important because of the prominence of the 
kpojito. 
The traditions about Gezo's coup and his kpojito also hint ominously 
of changing popular perceptions of the kpojito and her authority. VlSit­
ing some thirty years after Gezo's coup, the English naval commander 
Frederick Forbes heard a story that purported to explain the deposition 
of Adandozan. When a candidate for the stool of Jena (a town to the east 
of Abomey but otherwise not identifiable) fled for protection to Dahomey, 
Adandozan refused to assist him because his "mother" was from Jena, 
the implication being that Adandozan's kpojito did not support the 
would-he chief. At that. "already disgusted with the cruelties of their 
monarch, [the Dahomean people 1, with one consent, called his next 
brother, Gezo. to the throne." 21 Earlier kpojito had been known for pro­
tecting their homelands and for advancing or punishing local individuals 
and kinspeople. Now, in mid-nineteenth century, Forhes was hearing

--- Page 199 ---
182 
The Implications of Cultural and Commercial Change 
that the interests of the state, or of the Dahomean people, were not to be 
outweighed by the interests of the Kpojito. The growing hostility to fe­
male power as embodied by the Kpojito would continue in the reign of 
Glele. 
Innovations of the Age of Gao  
Both oral traditions and twentieth-century interpretive histories tend 
to focus on the age of Gezo as one of remarkable reform, innovation, 
and accomplishment. Herskovits is typical, introducing Gezo by saying, 
"With the accession of Gew . . .  the fortunes of the Aladaxonu dynasty 
rose." Recording oral traditions of the royal family, Le Herisse asserts that 
Gezo was second only to Wegbaja in achievements. because "Wegbaja 
(Oouegbadja) founded Dahomey; Gezo made it free." 2Z European ac­
counts, particularly numerous in the English popular press in the 1840-
75 period, also contribute to the impression of the centrality of Gezo in 
the history of Dahomey. By the weight of their numbers and details alone. 
they give the impression of a kingdom dramatically changed from the 
eighteenth century and enhance the reputation of Gezo as an innovator. 
A series of significant political. economic, and cultura1 changes did take 
place during the era of Gezo. But it is not dear that Dahomey by the end 
of the reign of Gezo was that different an entity, and some of the changes 
may have been in the eyes of the European beholders. 
WhY. then, is Gezo's reign remembered as so central to the history of 
Dahomey? A number of factors have conspired to distort. and possibly 
augment. the importance of the era of Gezo. First, the reign of Gezo 
appears in oral tradition to have been one of extraordinary length. 
Adandozan, Gezo's immediate predecessor, was in power for twenty-one 
years, but his remova1 from formal histories of the kingdom meant that 
changes that occurred during the two decades prior to Gezo's coup were 
attributed to Gezo's reign. In that sense, the period of Gezo looms par­
ticularly large in the history of Dahomey for good reason. More than 
sixty years of Dahomean history-out of a recorded lifetime of the king­
dom of fewer than two hundred years-are associated with this king 
alone. Moreover. the discrediting of Adandozan in the oral history of the 
kingdom of necessity marks his successor as dramatically different. Gezo

--- Page 200 ---
The Implications of cultural and Commercial Change 
183 
becomes the good and noble king who corrected the evils of his despotic 
predecessor. 
The oral descriptions of the kingdom's history that were recorded in 
the twentieth century were drawn mainly from the siblings and children 
of Glele, a son of Gezo. As such, they depict Gezo as an illustrious inno 
vator who set the stage for Glele. Gezo and Glele together represent the 
pinnacles of the glories of Dahomey, glories that are seen as all the more 
lustrous given the French conquest in the 1890S and the divisions in the 
royal family that it sparked. From the perspective of the Glele oral tradi 
tions, historical time is divided into three periods: a far-distant past at 
the founding of the kingdom and reign ofWegbaja; a middle-distant past 
of developments after Wegbaja; and the specifics of the reign of Glele. 
With the exception of Agaja's conquests to the coast, most major devel­
opments of the history of the kingdom are collapsed into the middle 
period, which is described effectively as the reign of Gezo. 
The perceptions of outsiders also had changed significantly by the time 
of the period of Gezo. As commercial traveJers, eighteenthcentury Eu­
ropean visitors had been concerned with political and economic details 
that might affect their relationships with the monarchy of Dahomey. By 
the 1840S, the European political and intellectual climate, particularly 
in the British homeland of the majority of midcentury visitors, had 
changed. Imbued with the humanitarian spirit of the first half of the 
nineteenth century, travelers were obsessed with the need to under 
stand Dahomey in order to reform it, and in particular to end what the 
British considered to be the dual evils of the slave trade and human sac­
rifice. Augmenting their humanitarian concerns was the spirit of in­
quiry associated with the growing interest in scientific exploration. Mid­
nineteenth-century visitors thus were insatiably curious about Dahomey 
and its culture, determined to make observations and record as many 
details as possible. 
Finaly, the Dahomean monarchy in the age ofGezo welcomed, indeed 
courted, contacts with Europeans. Suffering from extreme losses of reve­
nue with the decline in the slave trade, the monarchy was concerned to 
negotiate, if not a resumption of the slave trade, at least the substitution 
of other sources of revenue through cooperation with European nations.

--- Page 201 ---
J 84 
The Implications of Cultural and Commercial Change 
But the interest characteristic of the forty years of Gezo's reign went far 
beyond simple economics. and appears to have been motivated by a 
genuine interest in European culture and technology and a sincere cu­
riosity about how Dahomey might benefit from the adoption of Euro­
pean ways. That attitude in turn is reflected in the comments of European 
visitors. who on the whole responded warmly to Gezo and his court and 
filed their accounts with admiration for the king and with comments on 
his importance and his accomplishments. 
All of these factors work together to enhance and augment the im­
pression of the reign of Gezo as a period of extraordinary vigor in Da­
homean history. The problem with the rich historical material on the 
reign ofGezo, then, is to distinguish when a source is simply fleshing out 
our understanding of systems in place at an earlier date. and when a 
traveler or an oral tradition is describing something that in fact did not 
exist before-that was indeed an innovation of the period of Gew. Given 
these interpretive precautions. the period of Gezo is notable for five ma­
jor changes: the ending of the tributary relationship with Oyo, com­
memorated in Le Herisse's reference to Gezo "freeing" Dahomey, and 
the development of rivalry with the Egba Yoruba city-state of Abeokuta; 
the cultural impact of the settlement in Dahomey of large numbers of 
Yoruba-speaking slaves; the replacement of slaves by palm oil as the 
major commodity of overseas trade; the growth of the palace organiza­
tion and development of Dahomey's army of women; and the dramatic 
expansion in ceremonial and court life, that involved factors as seemingly 
disparate as increased militarism and the invention of ritual. The first 
change had little to do with initiatives of Gezo's monarchy. but was effec­
tively under way by the time he came to power. The latter four. which 
are al related to each other, were policy directions taken during the time 
of Gem, and can be seen at least in part as responses to continued chal­
lenges to the economic viability of the kingdom. 
Freedom from Oyc and Rivalry with Abeokuta 
The empire of Oyo had begun to collapse at its center even before the 
turn of the nineteenth century. The 1790S saw the deposition of an un­
popular alafin, or king, and the beginnings of provincial rebellions that 
would culminate by 1817 in a revolt by Muslims inspired by the Fulani

--- Page 202 ---
The Implications of Cultural and Commercial Change 
1 85 
jihad to the north. Dahomey had shown resistance to the weakening Oyo 
as early as the reign of Kpengla and appears to have refused to pay tribute 
at least at one point during the reign of his successor, Agonglo, thus pro· 
yoking another Oyo invasion to reestablish the tributary relationship. 
Resistance to Oyo appears to have continued in the following reign, be· 
cause a visitor just after the turn of the nineteenth century reported that 
Adandozan had been "irregular" in paying tribute to Oyo.23 
The final break came shortly after the deposition of Adandozan from 
the stool of Dahomey. Facing an Oyo further weakened by the Muslim 
revolt, Dahomey provoked war in 1823, possibly by refusing to pay trib· 
ute. Defeating Oyo forces in two separate engagements, the Dahomeans 
by the mid·1820S had effectively ended their tributary status. The reality 
was not so much that Dahomey had grown strong as that Oyo had begun 
to disintegrate. Indeed, the first two decades of Gezo's reign roughly co· 
incided with a period of intense internal warfare in Yorubaland, which 
culminated in the sacking of the capital city ofOyo in 1837. During those 
years, the constant fighting in the area that had been the empire of Oyo 
created thousands of refugees. These displaced persons flooded south­
wards. establishing new cities that in turn forced the restructuring of re­
lationships among states al the way to the coast. Other victims of the 
unrest became captives to be sold abroad. and coastal slave markets were 
swamped with Yoruba-speaking slaves. 
For Dahomey, the changed military-political relationship meant that 
for the immediate future, areas to the east. northeast, and southeast of 
Abomey that had formerly been protected by Oyo would be vulnerable 
to Dahomean attack. Moreover, freed from the threat of incursions from 
Oyo on the Abomey plateau, the Dahomeans could turn their attention 
to enemies elsewhere. Early in the reign of Gezo. wars were waged in 
Mahi country to the north and in Gbe-speaking and Akan-speaking 
areas to the southwest. With the Yoruba kingdoms of Ketu and Sabe to 
the east relatively strong. the Dahomeans then turned their attention 
to the southeast. where the Egbado Yoruba area was politically frag· 
mented and lay vulnerable to raids. By that time, they found that a 
new rival. Abeokuta, had begun to establish its interests in precisely the 
same area. 
Abeokuta had been forged by Egba Yoruba who had been driven

--- Page 203 ---
186 
The Implications of Cultural and Commercial Change 
southwards from their homelands with the disintegration of Oye. Many 
Egba had settled temporarily in the new city of Ibadan, but had ultimately 
moved westward to an easily defended site on the Ogun River. The 
Abeokutans looked to the west and south for land and access to the 
sea, seeing Egbadoland as their natural corridor, and Badagry, to the east 
of Porta Novo, their port. An important feature of the development of 
Abeokuta during the period of Gezo was the arrival there of numbers of 
Egba Yoruba who had been sold into the overseas trade. Liberated from 
slave ships by the British and landed in Sierra Leone, many acquired Eu· 
ropean trade skills and converted to Christianity before deciding to re· 
rum to Yorubaland. Having made their way inland from Badagry to 
Abeokuta, these returnees paved the way for the arrival of British mis· 
sionaries in the 18405. The missionaries in turn assisted the Egba in their 
political and ntilitary struggles, particularly with Dahomey, by providing 
ammunition and obtaining military advisors when Dahomey threatened. 
By the 1840S, Abeokuta had become a major rival and dominant pre¤ 
occupation of the Dahomean monarchy. A series of nearly. annual mili· 
tary encounters between Dahomey and the Egba, including an ambush 
of the Dahomean army in 1844 that led to the capture of royal regalia, 
turned Abeokuta into an archenemy. Dahomey would eventuaUy attack 
the fortified city of Abeokuta directly on two occasions, in 1851 and 1864, 
and both times it would be badly beaten. Meanwhile, though. the deluge 
of slave¥victims of the breakup of Oyo and the constant warfare against 
the Egba and other Yoruba·speaking peoples were yielding a massive 
population of captives. too large to be absorbed into Fon culture. Their 
presence in Dahomey was to have a deep and lasting impact on the 
kingdom. 
Yoruba Cultural Influence 
Yoruba culture, through tributary contacts with Oyo, had had an impact 
on Dahomey in the mid-eighteenth century during the reign ofTegbesu. 
At that period, Oye influence was felt at the highest levels of the state, as 
the monarchy created offices and organizational structures that appear to 
have been inspired by familiarity with the court of Oye. In contras4 dur¦ 
ing the reign of Gezo, Yoruba influence was widely diffused throughout

--- Page 204 ---
The Impficatfons of cufrurai and Commercial Change 
187 
Fan society, directly affecting even remote areas of the Abomey plateau 
and working its way upward to the highest decision-making levels of the 
monarchy. It was carried by the thousands of Yoruba-speaking captives 
sold or captured into slavery in the chaos of the collapse of the Oyo 
. 
emplfe. 
The Yoruba migration into Dahomey was not only related to the de­
cline of Oye but also to changes in the overseas trade that were beyond 
the control of the monarchy. By the time Gezo came to power, the slave 
trade had been officially abandoned by the major European slaving pow­
ers, though the illegal trade flourished. Over the four decades of Gezo's 
reign, the British were systematically attempting to suppress the slave 
trade by other states, setting up an antislavery squadron on the West Af­
rican coast to capture and free cargoes of slaves and entering into treaties 
with other European nations in hopes of stopping the trade. Ultimately, 
they began sending envoys to heads of African governments to the same 
end. By the 1840S, Dahomey began to be visited by a stream of emissaries 
with treaties and proposals for the ending of the export of slaves and the 
replacement of the slave trade with "legitimate commerce," which in the 
case of Dahomey would prove to be trade in oil-palm products. 
The Dahomeans resisted stopping the overseas slave trade. Neverthe­
less, despite occasional spurts of strength, it in fact declined steeply in 
volume during the first half of the nineteenth century. Meanwhile, the 
civil chaos in Yorubaland and Dahomey's own wars against her neighbors 
continued to yield large numbers of captives. With the overseas trade no 
longer a viable outlet for the bulk of the prisoners. larger numbers of 
captives were settled in the kingdom. 
Captives had been settled in earlier periods in and around Abomey. 
Families. even entire villages, can today recount the circumstances of their 
resettlement on the Abomey plateau under particular monarchs. Some, 
like the Akan-speaking village of brass casters at Hoja. less than four miles 
from the center of Abomey, maintained a distinct artisan tradition, along 
with vestiges of the language and culture of their areas of origin. Like 
Dahomeans of Fan origin, they owed tribute in goods and services to 
a court official, usually a member of the monarchy; otherwise, their 
communities were effectively self-governing. Many other captives were

--- Page 205 ---
188 
The Implications of cultural and Commercial Change 
integrated into Fan society as individuals. placed as wives or slaves in 
farming villages or urban households. where they adapted themselves to 
the language and culture of the dominant society. 
Because of its massive volume, the new Yoruba influx into Dahomey 
was of a different nature, heralding dramatic changes in Fon culture itself. 
Initially, large numbers of Yoruba.speaking captives were retained near 
the coast by Afro· Brazilian traders expanding their operations into palm· 
oil production. By the 1840S. communities of Yoruba·speaking captives 
were also visible on the Abomey plateau. In rural areas, they were con· 
ceotrated in plantations that ultimately became known for the cultivation 
of oil palms. In Abomey itself. they became the nucleus of a quarter of 
the city that has maintained an identity as an enclave of Yoruba culture 
up to the present day. Many more Yoruba·speaking persons were inte· 
grated into Dahomean families, where they began to have a dramatic im­
pact as culture brokers. 
Initially, the settlement of Yoruba captives on plantations may have 
been intended to be temporary, to employ slaves until they might be sent 
to Whydah for shipment overseas. Over time, and possibly as the corn· 
mercial production of palm oil developed, the plantations became a per· 
manent part of the Dahomean cultural landscape. The first such planta· 
tion on the Abomey plateau that was mentioned in European sources was 
Lefu Lefu, named for an Egba village attacked by the Dahomeans in 1843. 
The old and weak were killed after the attack. and probably some of the 
less firm were brought back for use as royal sacrifices. Healthy young 
people of both sexes, however. were settled near the road between Cana 
and Abomey 00 a plantation "under the direction of a Dahoman caboo· 
ceer." Frederick Forbes heard of the plantation in 1849 and described it 
glowingly as a place for cultivation of palms and corn, "justly remarkable 
for the superiority of its cultivation and the industry of its denizens."24 
Forbes's enthusiasm for Lefu Lefu was likely prompted by his desire to 
see Dahomey replace the slave trade with commerce in palm products. 
because other such plantations were less appealing. To the southwest of 
the City, along the east bank of the Coufo River, was the most infamous 
of the plantations, Afomai. With a name that meant literally "no foot 
(i.e., person) is allowed there," Afomai was forbidden to Dahomeans and

--- Page 206 ---
The Implications of Cultural and Commercial Change 
189 
became popularly dreaded as a place where no one went willingly and 
from which few returned. The numbers of plantations continued to grow 
through the second half of the nineteenth century. Le Herisse was able to 
collect the names of six slave camps a decade after the fal of the kingdom. 
At the time of the French conquest in 1892, much of the territory to the 
southeast of Abomey was farmed by slaves, who resided during the dry 
season at Goho, an area on the outskirts of the city. And Afomai was stiU 
in operation, being worked by some one thousand slaves.:I5 
In urban Dahomey. skilled Yoruba-speaking artisans became promi­
nent during the reign of Gezo. It is not dear whether they settled volun­
tarily as refugees from the constant warfare in the wake of Oyo's end. or 
whether they were part of the captive population taken by Dahomean 
armies. Earlier monarchies had patronized artisans. including Yoruba­
speaking persons, settling them with gifts of wives and slaves, usually in 
the section of Abomey developed for the descendants and courtiers of 
their king. Among others in the period, the Yemadje family of applique 
artisans, who arrived during the reign of Agonglo, flourished under the 
patronage of Gezo. Applique artistry was not mentioned by eighteenth­
century visitors at court. but it was prominent by the 1840S as decoration 
for umbrellas. tents, and army uniforms. 
The monarchy of Gew became known for the expanded scale at which 
it recruited artisans to the capital and for its characteristic use of the 
idiom of marriage to describe that recruitment, making the newly settled 
artisans ahosi. technically wives of the king. Indeed. a large portion of the 
population of Secon Hounli, the quarter settled by retainers of Gezo, 
today claims to descend from ancestors who were brought through the 
payment of "bridewealth" by that king. The Azali section of Abomey in­
cludes some of the quarter's most prominent smiths. who appear to have 
promoted the fortunes of the Yoruba god of iron, Ogun, renamed Gu in 
Dahomey. Gu was associated with the growing militarism of Dahomey 
during the period of Gem and was honored through his commemoration 
in a famous iron sculpture of a god in human form, his hat bristling with 
the iron implements associated with the power of metal. The statue of 
Gu, which was taken by the French in the 1890S and ultimately made its 
way to the collection of Paris's Musee de l'Homme. is said to have been

--- Page 207 ---
1 90 
The Implications of Cultural and Commercial Change 
crafted by the founder of a prominent Yoruba-speaking lineage, a smith 
named Akati. Akati in fact is an example of the upward mobility of these 
same Yoruba-speaking Abomeans. Said to have originally been sent to 
Afomai, where he smelted iron, he (or a descendant) was brought to 
Azali to practice smithing. An Akati ultimately became a member of the 
monarchy of Gezo, serving as gau, minister of war, before he died in the 
1851 assault on the walls of Abeokuta. 26 
Other Yoruba ritual and spiritual traditions began to flourish, in part 
through the agency of women who had been absorbed into Dahomean 
families as wives. Large numbers of girls and young women captured in 
war were incorporated into the palace organization. Many of the younger 
ones, dubbed 5udofi, "brought up here," were trained to become mem­
bers of the palace guard or standing army of women. Others became the 
gift-wives for princes, princesses, officials of the king, or other high­
ranking persons. By their large numbers, those Yoruba-speaking wives 
and mothers to Dahomean children were in a position to influence the 
next generation with their cultural traditions, and specifically the sons 
and daughters of Gezo who came to constitute, nearly exclusively, the 
monarchy of Glele. For example, the presence of the secret societies 
Oro and Egungun are dated by Abomeans to the period of Gezo. Egun­
gun, which may be the first masking society to have been permitted in 
Dahomey, was renamed Kutito (from ghost, or literally dead one from 
the other world). Its twentieth-century costuming-narrow-band loom 
strips of appliqueed fabric accompanied by drums suspended from the 
shoulder-link it to Oyo traditions. Even prominent Afro-Brazilian 
families in Whydah note a transformation of their Luso-Catholic culture 
during this period, adopting Kutito and Oro, as well as numerous Yoruba 
deities, thanks to women brought into families as slave-wives.27 
Diviners of Fa (Ifa in Yorubaland) were also becoming more promi­
nent in this period. Though Fa had been known in Dahomey since the 
1720S, it came slowly to prominence at the level of the monarchy. Tegbesu 
had been the first king to receive his kpoli, that is to begin the process of 
knowing his destiny. By the time of Gezo, there were an estimated dozen 
bokonon, or diviners, in the service of the king. During Glele's reign, when 
bokonon became the chief personal advisers to the king, selected children

--- Page 208 ---
The Imp/fcatfons of Cultural and Commercial Change 
1 9 '  
of the king himself were being sent to Yorubaland to train as diviners in 
the families of their mothers. 
Along with the existence of distinct settlements of Yoruba-speakers, 
there is some suggestion of social tensions between the newcomers and 
the Fon. Ironicaly, then, even while Fon culture was being transformed 
by Yoruba institutions, there appears to have been a distancing of indi­
vidual Yoruba-speakers from those who considered themselves to be true 
Dahomeans. Twentieth-century oral traditions, which were based on 
nineteenth-century realities, describe three legal statuses in Dahomean 
society: the ahovi, the children or descendants of the kings; the anato, 
free commoners; and the kannumon, or slaves. Though rank might 
change over the life of an individual, a person's legal status remained 
ahovi, anato, or kannumon. In fact, there were variations within each 
category that worked to disadvantage some individuals. Children born 
of kannumon were normally considered to be anato; however. some 
kannumon had become slaves in perpetuity. For example. glesi (literally, 
wife or dependent of cultivated land) were persons attached to land­
holdings in a manner comparable to European serfs; they were part of 
the estates granted by the kings to members of the royal family and to 
kpojito. Particularly associated with oil-palm cultivation, glesi kept a por­
tion of their harvests, giving the remainder to their patron. Gandoba were 
slave-women controlled by the palace. Granted to male and female re­
tainers of the king, gandoba would be married to a man of their owner's 
choice. Their male children became members of their owner's line; fe­
male children returned to the palace as gandoba. Evidence from the 
Dosso-Yovo family of Whydah similarly indicates that slave status could 
bring status disadvantage over more than one generation. Children of 
Yoruba captives granted to the family were made into soldiers, a practice 
that was common also in other prominent Whydah families, Each of 
these families had a war chief of Yoruba slave origins to lead their family 
anny when it was called up for war.2.lI 
Ethnic tensions are suggested. too, in traditions of the Hountondji 
smiths, who clearly saw themselves as rivals to the Yoruba newcomers. 
Oral traditions of the Hountondji stress the antiquity of their roots in 
Dahomey, arguing that they were brought from Allada at the behest of

--- Page 209 ---
1 92 
The Implications of Cultural and Commercial Change 
King Agaja, shortly after the conquest of that city-state in 1724, in or­
der to be the preeminent makers of weapons for the A1ladahonu. Em­
broidering a myth associated with the conquest of Whydah, a myth 
that almost certainly dates to a much later period than the 1720S, the 
Hountondji claim that they were involved in saving the day when the 
Dahomeans attacked the Hweda ofWhydah. The myth is that of the prin­
cess, Na Geze (chapter 2, pp. 59-60), who helped her father Agaja in his 
attack on Whydah by learning why guns purchased from the Europeans 
at the coast failed to work. Na Geze arranged to steal the hammers that 
had been removed by the Hwedas to keep the flintlocks from operating 
properly. In the Hountondji version, it was Hountondji smiths who reset 
those hammers. Certainly by the nineteenth century, and probably be­
fore, the Hountondji smiths had become better known as the leading 
silversmiths and jewelers to the kings. Nevertheless, the Hountondji in­
sist on their importance as makers of royal weaponry and as the most 
important of the smithing lineages of the capital. 
The inability of Dahomey fully to absorb so many of the new Yoruba 
immigrants presented a real danger to the kingdom's security. From the 
1840S, Dahomey looked mainly to the Yoruba-speaking east for targets of 
war. Many of the new captives in Dahomey would have had friends and 
relatives in areas marked for war. The existence of distinctive and large 
communities of Yoruba peoples, many of whom had been marginalized 
within the Dahomean social system, left the kingdom vulnerable to re­
actions and revolt. In 1855, a traveler reported that a conspiracy had been 
uncovered: the Egbas were about to attack with the assistance of people 
enslaved at Whydah and other Yoruba slaves owned by "natives in other 
parts of the country."29 Whether the danger was real or imagined, the 
panic that ensued underlined the problem of keeping large numbers of a 
potentially hostile population marginalized within the kingdom. The 
Yoruba influx of the nineteenth century, then, appears to have increased 
certain social tensions, even as it enriched Fon culture. 
The Trade in Palm Products 
A1though the slave trade had technically been made illegal on an inter­
national level by the time Gezo took power, the demand for slaves in the

--- Page 210 ---
The Implications of Cultural and Commercial Change 
1 93 
United States, Cuba, and Brazil continued until the effective abolition of 
slavery in the Western Hemisphere. between 1860 and 1890. At the same 
time, schemes for the purchase of slaves through thinly disguised requests 
for "indentured" workers or "free laborers" were proposed and enthusi­
astically accepted from time to time up until the consolidation of colonial 
control in the mid-1890S. The French in the late 1850s, for example, com­
peted against U.S. and Spanish American slave traders to obtain "free 
emigrants" to be transported to French possessions. The Portuguese in 
the late 1880s took several thousand "indentured laborers" to Sao Tome, 
and the Germans in the early 1890S helped to arm King Behanzin against 
the French by trading guns and amunition for "laborers" to work in 
their colony of Cameroon. 
From the perspective of the kingdom, then, the overseas slave trade in 
the nineteenth century became a less and less viable source of income, 
but it did not end definitively. By midcentury, there were periods when 
no buyers arrived along the coast, but the demand for persons to be 
shipped overseas continued to revive right up to the conquest of the 
kingdom by the French. The monarchy went to relatively great lengths 
to ensure that avenues remained open to permit the export of slaves as 
opportunities arose. Thus it would prove an ironic twist, and perhaps 
a form of poetic justice, that in early 1894 the last captives taken off 
Dahomean shores for involuntary transport to the Western Hemisphere 
were Behanzin and the vestiges of his court: five wives, a son, the prince 
who was his best friend, and several servants. 
Intent upon stamping out the overseas slave trade, British policy ig­
nored the ramifications of what continued to be an active internal com­
merce in slaves. Thus the British encouraged the palm-oil trade, a sup­
posedly "legitimate" product for overseas trade, but one that of necessity 
had to be produced, at least in part, by slave labor. In Dahomey the de­
velopment of production in labor-intensive palm products provided a 
substitute outlet for the captives taken in war and the slaves traded into 
Dahomey. 
By the 1840S, factors had begun to set up shop in Whydah and else­
where along the coast to encourage the export of palm-oil products. Palm 
oil had been a subsidiary product in the overseas trade since the late

--- Page 211 ---
1 94 
The Implications of Cultural and Commercial Change 
eighteenth century. Its development as a product of commercial agricul­
ture and major export occurred relatively quickly between 1840 and 1860. 
Afro-Brazilian slave traders appear initially to have cultivated coastal 
plantations of palm trees and staffed them with slaves awaiting transport 
overseas. Francisco Feiix de Souza is generany credited with influencing 
the monarchy to encourage oil products in the early 1840S through a 
series of administrative decrees that effectively promoted palm oil as 
a commercial crop. For example, undergrowth was to be cleared from 
around young trees. which enlarged their yield and protected them when 
fields were burned before the planting of other crops. The felling of trees 
for palm wine was prohibited, and oil palms were declared sacred and 
hence protected from destruction. Despite the administrative interest 
in promoting the oil trade, the monarchy showed little interest initially 
in commercial agriculture for itself, leaving palm-oil production to the 
Afro-Brazilians, to the Saros (freed slaves returned from Sierra Leone), 
and to small Dahomean producers. It was only in the 1850S that the mon­
archy moved definitively to begin to produce palm oil for the export 
trade. By the end of that decade, the production and trade in palm prod­
ucts was such that the quantity of palm oil exported from Dahomey was 
as high as it would be in the 189os. JO 
Twentieth-century historians agree that the transition from slave to 
palm products meant an effective lessening of the economic strength of 
the monarchy. In comparison with the overseas slave trade. the trade in 
oil-palm products had distinct economic disadvantages for the Abomey 
monarchy. First, since most slaves were "produced" through warfare. the 
slave trade required the organization of large raiding parties with access 
to firearms, which made it relatively easy for a state to monitor. tax, and 
control. In contrast. the production of palm oil was rather democratic. 
suited not only to large plantations but also to small producers who could 
and did bring their produce directly to Atlantic ports like Whydah. and 
who might avoid attempts by a state to expropriate a portion of the prod­
uct of their labor. There is for example evidence for Porto Novo of the 
inability of chiefs and other would-be middlemen to control the collec­
tion and sale of the oil to coastal shippers.)1 
Slaves could be marched to the coast, thus incurring only the cost of 
their maintenance before sale. Large-scale production of pabn oil, on the

--- Page 212 ---
The Impllcarlons of Culrural and Commercial Change 
1 95 
other hand, required carriers, whose loads were limited to five-gallon day 
containers and who had to be maintained during a roundtrip journey to 
a port. The commercial production of palm products thus favored pro­
ducers located near the coast, or at least near a navigable waterway. giving 
a great advantage to the coastal communities that the monarchy had long 
distrusted. And unlike slaves, who metaphorically could be plucked like 
ripe fruit from their home villages, albeit with the use of force, palm oil 
was produced through means that were highly labor-intensive. Two his­
torians, Patrick Manning and John Reid, have independently calculated 
the implications of the intensity of labor required to produce and trans­
port oil in Dahomey. Manning estimates that the production of a ton of 
oil required some 315 workdays of processing from seventeen tons of 
palm fruit bunches (roughly ten tons of fruit). One ton of kernels. pro­
duced by cracking open the nuts after the oil had been extracted from 
the fruit, required an additional 167 workdays. Reid reckons that portage 
of a ton of oil from the Abomey area to the coast would have involved 
another 420 workdays. He suggests that the production of two thousand 
tons of oil from the Abomey region would have involved the fun-time 
work of about ten thousand slaves during the six months of the year when 
oil was usually harvested and processed. Taking a dramatic midcentury 
inflation of the cowry currency into account, he calculates that by the 
1860s a ton of palm oil produced in the Abomey area by slave labor and 
transported to Whydah would have incurred production costs of 
£18 7S. 6d. and been sold for £22 10S.)l Even under the best conditions. 
profit margins from the sale of palm products could not begin to ap­
proach the levels of the slave trade, and it is no wonder that the monarchy 
showed little enthusiasm for commercial agriculture. 
Not only was the palm-oil trade far less profitable than the slave trade. 
but Dahomey's continued interest in warring and raiding for slaves in the 
late nineteenth century may have interfered with commercial agriculture. 
Where attacks were made, warfare disrupted trade routes. the argument 
goes. War also drew people away from home during the dry season. No­
vember through March, the usual period for palm-oil harvesting and 
processing. though the fruit can be harvested year-round. Elsewhere, and 
in the twentieth-century colony of Dahomey, palm-oil processing was 
a dry-season complement to the growing of food crops; in that sense.

--- Page 213 ---
1 96 
The ImplfCCltlons of Cultural and Commercial Change 
warring for the slave trade did disrupt the entire farming cycle. Never­
theless, the question of whether or not the two trades were mutually ex­
clusive is debatable. Certainly in the early years, the Afro-Brazilians 
found the slave and oil trades to be complementary, because together 
they permitted slaves to be usefully employed until an opportunity to slip 
them off shore and into the clandestine trade might ariseY From the 
monarchy's perspective, a similar complementarity is evident. Slaves 
could be kept on plantations and, in the brief periods when slave trading 
revived, they could be sent to Whydah and other embarkation points. 
Certainly warfare at times did interrupt trade routes and prevent oil from 
being carried to the coast, most notably when war was waged south of 
the lama swamp. But as the century passed, that sometimes became the 
point-to interfere with the processing and sale of oil by others. Pro­
cessing of oil during the rainy season did in fact put extra labor burdens 
on Dahomean farmers and, as we shall see, had an impact on the division 
of labor by gender. But there may have been other rationales for it. For 
example, rainy-season processing would have eased the difficulty of mak­
ing palm oil on the Abomey plateau. With no rivers, lakes, or natural 
sources of ground water, there were and continue to be serious shortages 
of water during the dry season. Since large amounts of water were re­
quired for the processing of palm oil, it made sense to process oil between 
the end of March and September, when water was far more plentiful 
around Abomey. 
Despite the difficulties of production and transport, by midcentury 
the monarchy had begun to establish palm plantations on the Abomey 
plateau. Slave villages for agricultural production had been established 
regularly in Dahomey for more than a hundred years, but presumably 
preserved the division of lab or by gender that obtained more broadly in 
farming in the region. Large-scale production of oil-palm products, how­
ever, had labor requirements that may have necessitated a change in gen­
der roles required of slaves controlled by the monarchy. Male captives 
possibly were being forced to process palm oil, something that was con­
sidered to be women's work and was viewed with contempt by Yoruba­
speaking men. This characteristic of palm-oil production-that it was 
considered to be women's work-was to have important social and eco­
nomic implications for nineteenth-century Dahomey,34

--- Page 214 ---
The Implications of Cultural and Commercial Change 
197 
Typically, men climbed the palm trees and cut the bunches of red fruit. 
Women did virtually everything else to produce palm oil: carry the clus­
ters of fruit to a processing point, boil them in water, trample the fruit to 
remove the nuts from the oil-bearing pericarp, separate the nuts and fiber 
from the trampled pulp and squeeze the oil out of the pulp, skim the oil 
off the top of the water and then extract even more oil from the pulp. 
The collected oil had to be boiled to separate out impurities and residual 
water. Finally, the nuts were dried and cracked to remove the palm ker­
nels, which were also exportable, though they were not initialy a part of 
the trade.35 
But the processing of palm oil was far from the sum total of women's 
work in Dahomey. Besides the cooking, cleaning, child care, gathering of 
firewod, and fetching of water that were usual home-centered tasks for 
women, they were centrally involved in agriculture. Accounts of the gen­
der division of labor in farming are reasonably consistent from the late 
seventeenth to the twentieth century. Men were instrumental in clearing 
fields and planting; women tended the crops and harvested. Hoeing ap­
pears to have been women's work in the precolonial period, but was 
done only by men by the early twentieth century.36 In addition, women 
were cited as traders in markets from the earliest records, and by mid­
nineteenth century were also frequently seen working as long-distance 
porters. Obviously, not every woman worked at al these occupations. It 
is un likely, for example, that women who hired out as porters also pro­
cessed palm oil for sale. It is not clear if market women were selling only 
oil and other products made by themselves and their dependents, or 
whether they were urban-based, full-time traders acting as middlemen 
between producers and exporters. 
Nevertheless, given the labor intensity of palm-oil production, com­
bined with the expectations of women's work in other areas, the intro­
duction of the export trade in palm products has to have heralded a 
massive increase in demand for the labor of women. Moreover, that de­
mand for increased women's labor came at the end of two hundred years 
of overall decline in population in the area of Dahomey. The new situ· 
ation had significant gender implications. Because palm products could 
be manufactured on a small scale, women who had processed palm oil 
for domestic consumption prior to the opening of the trade may have

--- Page 215 ---
1 98 
The Implications of Cultural and Commercial Change 
seen it as a new source of cash income. They could expand their own 
personal production, because women -married or single. free or slave­
had the right to amas personal wealth outside the control of the person 
on whom they depended. Indeed. travelers at midcentury testified to 
numbers of women seling small quantities of oil to European factors. J7 
At another level. the trade had implications, and opportunities, for entre­
preneurial women who might be able to mobilize the labor of other 
women -women who owned many female slaves, or women who were 
head wives in large households. Yet even women with extra resources had 
obligations to the person-husband or lineage head-upon whom they 
depended. Thus it did not necessarily follow that the production of palm 
oil would make women as a category more powerful, or even necessarily 
more wealthy. With a reduced population, and with women's work a key 
to success, the question became one of who controlled large numbers of 
women and their labor. A woman or man who could control the labor of 
women, or the labor of male slaves who could be forced to do women's 
work, could become a major player in the trade in oil products. That 
presumably was the impetus, along with the insecurity of markets for 
slaves at the coast, that prompted the establishment of plantations of slave 
laborers-female and male-on the Abomey plateau. 
The Growth of the Palace and Development 
of the Army of Women 
From the perspective of the monarchy, women by mid-nineteenth cen­
tury had become more important, not because they could become allies 
or partners in the building of a state but because their labor could enrich 
those who controlled it, just as the slaves captured in the eighteenth cen­
tury enriched those who sold them. Moreover, because the oil trade was 
less easily controlled than the slave trade, the talents of entrepreneurial 
women who might become independently wealthy through the trade 
needed to be channeled into the support of the monarchy. By the 1840S, 
the story of Dahomey becomes one more fuly concerned with attempts 
by the monarchy to control access to women, and to monopolize both 
their talents and their labor. Those attempts were manifest at the level 
of the palace organization. Perhaps an indication of the success of the

--- Page 216 ---
The Implications of Cultural and Commercial Change 
1 99 
monarchy in controlling the best of Dahomey's women and channeling 
their energies to its uses was provided during my field experience as 
I searched for stories of prominent women in the kingdom. I found that 
virtually al of the women remembered in the region of Abomey for their 
importance or riches were either ahosi or princesses; conversely, people 
along the coast would describe independent wealthy women, and par­
ticularly women involved in the palm-oil trade, women of Mina and 
Yoruba origins who carried on their work in the nineteenth century in 
areas peripheral to the core of the kingdom. 
Estimates of the population of Dahomey were always highly specula­
tive, and estimates of the numbers of women within the palace organi­
zation, hidden from public view by massive mud wals, were even more 
subject to question. Nevertheless, there appears to have been a dramatic 
growth in the size of the palace population during the nineteenth century. 
A 1724 visitor claimed there were "at least" two thousand women in the 
palace, an estimate that was increased to between three thousand and 
four thousand by the turn of the nineteenth century. By mid-nineteenth 
century, some five thousand to six thousand women were said to inhabit 
the palace. A French mission to Dahomey in 1889 estimated the Abomey 
palace population at seven thousand to eight thousand. Those figures 
were echoed by Le Herisse, who lived in Abomey shortly after the fall of 
the kingdom and insisted that a figure of more than eight thousand per­
sons in the palace in the second half of the nineteenth century was not 
the least exagerated.38 If population estimates of 150,000 to zOO,ooo for 
the kingdom as a whole are correct for the late nineteenth century, then 
the palace organization may have included fully 4 to 5 percent of the 
entire population of the kingdom. 
Many of the inhabitants of the expanded palace were Yoruba captives. 
But the recruitment of Dahomean women into the king's service also 
appears to have become significantly more systematic in the nineteenth 
century. Writing in the 1760s, Pommegorge had claimed that each com­
moner family was required to offer a daughter as tribute to the king. A 
century later, visitors were told that the Gezo monarchy had required 
"every Dahoman of note" to present his daughters, and that they then 
placed them in the palace in accordance with the class structure of

--- Page 217 ---
200 
The Implications of Cultural and CommercIal Change 
the kingdom. The king "selected the most promising of the children of the 
upper ten [percent], and created them officers, while the lower orders 
were dubbed soldiers, and the children of slave parents became the slaves 
of the Amazons within the palace." During Glele's reign, a court official, 
the kpakpa, traveled around the countryside to visit villages at three-year 
intervals and select girls for service to the monarchy. An account provided 
by a contemporary Abomean family hints that the visits were not wel­
come: "The king's representatives came and took daughters. The whole 
family would be assembled and the head of the family would be asked 
three times in succession, are there more children in the house? After 
hearing a negative reply three times, the king's people took a drink pre­
pared by the ajaho [minister of religion] and gave it to a chicken. If the 
chicken crowed, no children were hidden; if the chicken died, a search 
would be made and the girls hidden would be taken." The head of another 
family, based in Zagnanado on the eastern frontier of nineteenth-century 
Dahomey, recalled the traditional means of greeting royalty-kneeling 
and throwing the dirt of the courtyard over one's head and shoulders. For 
him, rather than receiving bridewealth in return for losing a daughter to 
Abomey, one received "dust on your head."39 
In 1850 Forbes was told, but did not believe, that Gezo no longer per­
mitted women to be sacrifice victims. Twenty years later, Skertchly noted 
that, although women were sometimes presented along with the men 
slated for sacrifice, he "never heard of a woman being decapitated as an 
offering." He learned that one of the six major laws of Dahomey was that 
women were not to leave the country, which indicates both the relative 
importance and the scarcity of women in the late Dahomean state.40 The 
transition toward more confiscatory means of drawing women into the 
service of the monarchy paralleled other administrative changes that 
would make the monarchy an increasingly repressive government as the 
century wore on. 
Meanwhile, though, the activities of the ahosi women residents of the 
various palaces of Dahomey were becoming more visible to visitors. Of 
all the king's women, travelers would spill the most ink over the women 
soldiers. The king's female bodyguard and palace troops had existed for 
nearly a century prior to Gezo's reign, and his coup had been resisted by

--- Page 218 ---
The implications of Cu/tufCll and Commercial Change 
20 I 
the female palace guard. In the aftermath, the monarchy was faced with 
a dassic decision: whether to suppress the palace troops that had opposed 
the coup or to reform it into a force loyal to the new regime. Gezo's 
monarchy chose the latter course, but then did far more than simply 
work to ensure the loyalty of the palace corps; rather, they added to the 
palace guard an elite standing army of women that was better equipped, 
disciplined, and trained than that of the men. By the 1840S, Freeman re­
ported that Dahomey's women soldiers "excell in martial appearance any 
body of native troops I have ever seen." lohn Duncan echoed the senti­
ment, calling them "all well armed, and generally fine strong healthy 
women, and doubtless capable of enduring great fatigue . . .  their appear­
ance is more martial than the generality of the men; and if undertak­
ing a campaign, I should prefer the females to the male soldiers of this 
country." 41 
A certain uniformity of dress for the palace guard had been noted by 
late-eighteenth-century visitors. Now both the women's army and the 
men's, appeared in uniforms. "They wear a blue and white striped cotton 
surtout, the stripes about one and a half inch wide, of stout native manu­
facture, without sleves, leaving freedom for the arms. The skirt or tunic 
reaches as low as the kilt of the Highlanders. A pair of short trowsers is 
worn underneath, reaching two inches below the knee. The cartouche­
box [cartridge belt], or agbwadya, forms a girdle, and keeps al their dress 
snug and dose." 42 The wearing of pants gave the soldiers freedom of 
movement, and was as unusual for Dahomean women as below-the-knee 
shorts would have been for European women of the day. The tunic top 
most likely was drawn from Yoruba culture, but was tailored to avoid 
bulkiness that could hamper movement. Companies were distinguished 
by emblems appliqued to caps worn by the women. Three midcentury 
insignia, for example, were a crocodile, a cross, and a crown. These were 
parade uniforms. In the field, the fighting women wore shorts and tunics 
of brown fabric, presumably manufactured of locally grown and woven 
cotton. Their bodies were adorned with protective charms, "necklaces, 
projecting glorias of brown monkey skins, quantities of fetish beads, tal­
ismans and other decorations." 43 
The infantry were the most numerous of the women soldiers. Best

--- Page 219 ---
202 
The Implications of Cultural and Commercial Change 
armed of any Dahomean troops, the women soldiers used their firearms 
in the European manner, aiming and shooting from the shoulder, while 
at least some of the male troops continued to fire from the hip. A visitor 
in the early 1860s watched a demonstration of shooting at targets, and 
was particularly impressed when "the King's body-guard of Amazons dis­
tinguished themselves by their good shots." The women's infantry were 
described as carrying a variety of anus: Danish muskets and short swords 
in the 1840S; carbines, trade guns, and short sabers in the 1850S; and 
Tower muskets, also known as the Brown Bess, in the 1860s. Like those 
of other African armies of the nineteenth century, the Dahomean fire­
arms were often of lesser quality than those of European armies, and the 
Dahomeans were aware of their deficiencies. After hearing complaints by 
the crown prince, Hahansu (Ahanhanzo), about the quality of imported 
guns, a visitor in 18]1 admitted dryly that "the trade guns of which he 
spoke are Birmingham manufactured articles . . .  but as they can be pur­
chased retail for seven shillings and sixpence, their finish is not the acme 
of perfection." oH Moreover, the arms sold in Africa were at best the weap­
ons of the previous generation of European armies, and at worst, guns 
that were long obsolete in Europe. The Brown Bess, for example, went 
out of service among British forces between 1839 and 1848. Nevertheless, 
by late in the century, women sharpshooters would be able to threaten 
invading French troops. 
Beyond the infantry, there were additional specialized corps, each of 
which was distinguished by unusual arms or functions and made public 
appearances without fail on ceremonial occasions in Abomey. Most strik­
ing were the women soldiers dubbed "razor women" by visitors. They 
carried a weapon, said to have been designed by a brother of Gezo, that 
was modeled on the straight-edged razor of nineteenth-century Europe, 
with a blade described by visitors in lengths ranging from eighteen inches 
to more than three feet. Like the razor on which it was based, the blade 
snapped into a wooden carrying cover. The whole apparatus weighed 
more than twenty pounds and prompted Burton to comment with char­
acteristic sarcasm that "the terror which they inspire may render them 
useful.» A company of archers paraded regularly, too. A visitor in the 
mid-1850S claimed that they were chosen from "among the young virgin

--- Page 220 ---
The Implications of Cultural and Commercial Change 
203 
daughters of the best families of the kingdom." Observers believed they 
were not used in combat. Burton claimed that the archers were used 
in the field only as scouts, porters, and carriers of the wounded, and 
Skertchly, visiting eight years later, reported that they were mainly a 
"show COrpS."45 
Visitors at midcentury also reported seeing women armed with blun­
derbusses, a weapon that had been popular in the eighteenth century in 
Europe. Blunderbusses had a fearsome reputation in their day because of 
the erroneous belief that the belied muzzle would scatter shot in all direc­
tions, a belief that was likely sold along with the weapons to African pur­
chasers. Blunderbusses were designed to be fired at close range; as such 
they were suited to the Dahomean style of warfare. Moreover, their wide 
bores made them easy to reload quickly. Even though they were impos­
sible to aim accurately because of the shortness of the muzzle, more than 
one writer has commented on the powerful psychological impact of star­
ing into the gaping maw of a blunderbuss muzzle, an impact that was 
presumably not lost on the Dahomeans and their enemies. But in Eu­
rope, the blunderbuss, like the other arms used by the Dahomean infan­
try, had given way to more accurate and effective arms, in this case by 
the 1840S. 
Much was also made of the company of elephant hunters, who were 
reportedly particularly husky women. Le Herisse offers what must have 
been a commonly repeated story, that the corps of women warriors had 
evolved from palace women who were elephant hunters during the reign 
of Wegbaja. The story is unlikely, since elephants had been absent from 
areas south of the Abomey plateau in the seventeenth century and had 
reappeared only at the end of the eighteenth, as the human population 
declined. In Gezo's day, elephant hunting was done during the dry season 
in the Lama swampland by women hunters "under the charge of a eu­
nuch, but immediately under the command of an amazon officer." The 
meat was consumed during ceremonies in Abomey and the skulls and 
bones were salvaged for ritual purposes. The tusks made their way to 
Europe through Whydah. Forbes reported in 1850 that the hunters tar­
geted the youngest elephants, which may explain why a dozen years later 
al the elephants had been hunted out of Dahomey proper. By the 1870S,

--- Page 221 ---
204 
The Implications of Cultural and Commercial Change 
the few remaining elephants in the hills of Mahi country to the north 
were in the process of being decimated by the Dahomean hunters.46 
Although large numbers of the palace population had as their occu­
pation that of professional soldier, there is no way to estimate their num­
bers precisely. Nineteenth-century observers tended to refer to the entire 
palace population as "amazons." Moreover, a ceremonial fiction played 
out during Customs held that everyone in the population of the nation 
was a warrior. which further confuses the issue of who actually fought. 
In the mid-1840S, the female troops were said to number five thousand 
to six thousand. prior to Dahomey's disastrous 1851 attack on the Yoruba 
city of Abeokuta. when they lost from one thousand to two thousand. In 
the early 1860s. an epidemic of smallpox and the second fruitless attack 
on Abeokuta again thinned the ranks of the women's army. and estimates 
of their numbers for the remainder of the reign of Glele range from fif­
teen hundred to three thousand. Part of the difficulty of knowing the 
numbers of ahosi in the standing army lies in the manner by which 
the armed forces were assembled for war, the old system having been 
preserved: the king's standing army continued to be supplemented by 
contingents offered by chiefs. officials. and other prominent individuals. 
Now, though. both the standing army and the forces called up for war 
included women along with men.·7 
By fully incorporating women into both the standing and draft forces. 
the Dahomeans had gone full circle. Warfare and weaponry, tradition 
maintained, had originated with farmers who used their hoe handles to 
fight enemies who surprised them in their fields. In ancient times, en­
tire communities-men and women-had risen up to defend their 
lands and their lives. In like manner, by mid-nineteenth century, the 
entire nation of Dahomey rose up annually for war. The idea of farmers 
abandoning their fields when called to war was enshrined in a weapon 
paraded by women soldiers in the I870s-red-colored guns with brass 
hoes fixed like bayonets to their muzzles.48 
There were ironies in the use of farming and fighting metaphors. 
Farming. and particularly the labor-intensive work of weeding, harvest­
ing, and processing agricultural produce. was women's work. The war 
songs of the women soldiers played on farming imagery, contrasting the

--- Page 222 ---
The Implications of Cultural and Commercial Change 
205 
drudgery of farm work with the glories of soldiering. Two war songs that 
have been preserved underline the women soldiers' freedom from farm 
labor: 
We are digging up, turning over, plowing up our spirit. Let the men 
harvest the maniac! 
We are digging up, turning over, plowing up our spirit. Let the men 
harvest the maniac! 
Until our mouth opens to swallow the calabash, the bloody way will 
remain bloody. 
We are digging up, turning over, plowing up our spirit. Let the men 
harvest the manioc! 4 
Men, men, stay! 
Let the men stay at home! 
Let them grow maize 
and cultivate palm trees . . . .  
We, we wil go to war. 
We march, our swords forward! 
They form around the kingdom 
a high, high rampart, 
As high as the mountain of the Mahis. 
We are going to plow the entrails of the enemy. so 
Gezo, possibly using intentional irony, extended the metaphor in his ar­
guments with British envoys who sought a Dahomean commitment to 
the end of the slave trade. On more than one occasion the king pleaded 
that "my people are a military people, male and female .
. . .  I cannot send 
my women to cultivate the soil, it would kil them."" 
To be a woman soldier circa 1850 was a position of some prestige, yet 
paradoxically one that many women would have tried to avoid. Many if 
not most women soldiers were captives, indicating that Dahomean girls 
as a rule managed to avoid their ranks. Rumor had it that Dahomean 
men would offer recalcitrant wives to the king for his army; other soldiers 
were said to have been convicted criminals. Myths swirled around the

--- Page 223 ---
206 
The Implications of Cultural and Commercial Change 
women warriors and continued to grow long after their companies were 
disbanded. Their sexuality was said to have been strictly controlled 
through required celibacy, prompting more than one male writer to link 
the women's ferocity to their lack of sexual fulfilment.52 Recently, it has 
even been claimed that they underwent clitoridectomy. presumably to 
control their sexual desire.S) Le Herisse's research, carried out shortly af­
ter the end of the kingdom, led him to conclude more reasonably that 
"we don't believe that anyone should give credibility to certain descrip­
tions that show us amazons bound to virginity or forced to submit to 
cutting off the right breast. We have not obtained any oral information 
from the natives corroborating these facts. On the contrary, we have met 
several former warriors who . . .  seem to have preserved from their old 
occupation only an undisputed fighting spirit that gets applied mainly to 
their husbands." In fact, though the soldiers did not normally become 
physical wives of the king, Glele is known to have fathered children by 
warriors. 54 
There was complicity on the part of the monarchy in the myth­
making. in the distancing of the women warriors from ideals of female 
behavior, and in the emphases on the women's ferocity and bloodthirsti­
ness. We have to assume that the effort was a deliberate attempt to strike 
fear in potential enemies-a dual fear. It combined the threat of defeat 
and death in warfare with the added humiliation of being subdued by the 
hand of a woman. That such a popular (male) image of women existed 
by mid-nineteenth century speaks volumes to the changing perceptions 
of women and their place in Dahomean society. Publicly, the warrior 
songs of the women not only celebrated war but reflected and responded 
to that popular imagery. Contempt for the status of women suffuses two 
typical songs: 
This war where we are going. 
Since we are armed with our guns 
We fear nothing. 
We are marching together, we are marching like men 
Thus we are going to our goal. 
No one gives mustard

--- Page 224 ---
The Implications of Cultural and Commercial Change 
207 
In place of an offering to a divinity. 
Ogou Kploya-Ogun the destructor 
We have already asked him to destroy 
To destroy, to destroy 
We are going to march like men. µ5 
We march'd against Attahpahms as against men, 
We came and found them women. 
What we catch in the bush we never divide. 56 
Abeokutan myth has it that the Dahomean women warriors' participa­
tion in battle in 1851 provoked a backlash. When the only soldiers to 
scramble over the city walls were women, the Egba were unable to follow 
their tradition of decapitating the first enemy captured and cutting off 
his genitals. Furious at the insult, they fought all the harder.37 
Some observers recognized that the women soldiers held high status 
within the palace, even though paradoxically large numbers of them were 
slaves by origin and legal status. Freeman said that they "are fully aware 
that their position is a most singular one; and they appear to glory in it." 
They resided in a separate section of the palace interior, with their meals 
prepared for them by their servants, numbered by Surton at "from one 
to 50 each." Their pride and their loyalty to the monarchy were legen­
dary. A missionary stationed at Abeokuta published a story about the 
loyalty instilled in sudofi soldiers "brought up here." Following the 1851 
attack on Abeokuta, the Egbas took their prisoners to Ketu. where they 
were to be redeemed by the Dahomeans. One of those prisoners was a 
Ketu girl captured as a child and reared to be a soldier. When her parents 
learned of her presence and tried to redeem her. she refused, saying "No. 
I will go back to my master." 58 
Exemplary service in the armed forces was rewarded at court with 
great pomp, and the monarchy made a point of introducing visitors to 
outstanding women soldiers. In the mid-184oS, John Duncan was pre­
sented to Adadimo, a young woman who had been promoted within the 
army for taking a male prisoner in each of the preceding two years. A 
later visitor was introduced to Wedje, an agbadjibeto (spy) during the

--- Page 225 ---
20B 
The Implications of Cultum/ and Commercial Change 
reign of GleJe. Her service had been so valuable that she was rewarded 
with a house and land to the southwest of Abomey; on her death, her 
spirit was added to those of the Nesuhwe, the cult of the royal dead. A 
young Yoruba-speaking soldier interviewed in the early twentieth century 
told of receiving cloth and cowries after kiling a man in warfare; she had 
then been taken as a physical wife by Glele.59 
These accounts of recognition through prowess in war raise questions 
about patterns of advancement within the palace in the late nineteenth 
century. Did women rise to high office through battlefield accomplish­
ment? At midcentury, it appears, at least some women in high positions 
were directly active in the field of battle, but it is not clear if they had 
been placed in their positions initially because of valor in war. The meu­
non (female counterpart to the second minister) was killed in Dahomey's 
war against Atakpame in 1840; the miganon (female prime minister), on 
the other hand, was accused of having fled the field of battle with her 
troopS.60 
Another distinguished soldier and high-ranking palace official of the 
1840S, a woman named Yewe, looms inordinately large in the British ac­
counts. She was assigned to serve as "English mother," an officer respon­
sible for the affairs of British visitors who was present when they ap­
peared at royal audiences and who looked after their well-being. Freeman 
spoke glowingly of "Lady Yaway" and her hospitality. On his arrival in 
Cana, for example, Yewe provided twenty-five calabashes of food for his 
retainers and six large basins of "stews, hashes, roast fowls, yams" for 
Freeman himself. "Thus we were al regaled with a plentiful supply of 
fresh and wholesome food," a supply that continued throughout his stay 
and was accompanied by locally brewed beer "of excellent quality." 
When John Duncan arrived in Abomey in 1845, he was introduced to the 
same "mother," whose name he transcribed as Knawie, a woman who 
commanded a regiment of six hundred women. Duncan later explored 
areas north of Abomey under the protection of Gezo and was greeted 
outside one town by "bad fetish," a pot of magical substances left in 
the road. Later, the Dahomean army avenged the insult by attacking 
and "breaking" the town. Forbes learned that the key to victory in that 
engagement had been Yewe, the English mother. Burton never met the

--- Page 226 ---
The Implications of Cultuml and Commercial Change 
209 
English mother when he visited thirteen years later, though he was aware 
of the tradition, which may mean that Yewe had died by 1863 and had not 
yet been replaced.61 
On the other hand. we know that others of the women officials did not 
gain their rank through warfare. For example, Glele's yovoganon was 
a Yoruba woman from Oyo named Miagbe (called Na Dudeagoa by 
Burton). She apparently was one of the first wives given to Glele as crown 
prince. for she is remembered for having produced his first official chil­
dren, a set of twins who were followed by two additional sets, a mark of 
extraordinary distinction in Fon society. The first set were girls and were 
designated to become Migansi and Meusi. the prestigious princess-wives 
of the first ministers of the state.62 
Whether soldiers or not, women within the palace appear more often 
in the nineteenth-century accounts than earlier, carrying out responsi­
bilities for the palace and themselves. Travelers would typically first meet 
the king's women en route from Whydah to Abomey; ahosi staffed rest­
ing stops at regular intervals from AUada north to Abomey: Henvie. 
Akpwe (or Appey), Agrime. and Cana. They would meet visitors with the 
traditional offering of water and then provide meals. European trave1ers 
would be lodged in the homes of male officials. 
Once in Abomey. visitors would complain bitterly of having to make 
way for processions of ahosi outside the palace walls, since men were 
required to turn their gaze away when women of the palace went about 
town. Forbes, for example, grumbled to his diary on June 6, 1850 that 
"the bells of the sable beauties are constantly warning man to run and 
hide himself. I was one morning near three quarters of an hour endeav­
ouring to enter the Cumassee gate. from the constant succession of royal 
wives carrying food from one palace to the other. This morning. as we 
were leaving, we were desired not to go to the eastward, as 4000 of the 
king's wives (amazons, &c.) were gone forth to bathe."6) 
Toward the end of Gezo's reign. we find evidence that the ahosi had 
embarked on a variety of new and expanded activities that had numerous 
economic implications. First, some of their work was clearly meant to 
enhance the royal income. which had dropped so dangerously with the 
decline in the slave trade. Second, the work of the ahosi contributed

--- Page 227 ---
2 J 0 
The Implications of Cultural and Commercial Change 
to the continued. and enlarged. public royal prestige so evident in the 
later years of Gezo's reign. And third, the women's work provided income 
for the women themselves; like wives in common households, they were 
expected to earn their own keep. 
Along with the development of the production of palm products on a 
commercial level, the monarchy by mid-nineteenth century had begun 
numerous industries staffed by female and slave labor. Palm-oil cultiva­
tion and processing was just one of many. Though plantations of palms 
on the Abomey plateau were associated with slave labor drawn from 
Yorubaland, the processing of oil later in the century appears to have been 
in the hands of the ahosi. For example, a visitor in the early 1870S was 
shown an old palace between Cana and Abomey that was being used as a 
palm-oil factory under the operation of the king's women. By this period, 
ahosi were involved in transporting oil to Whydah, where a portion of 
the yovogan's compound had been given over to the ahosi oil carriers. 
The ahosi porters would have returned with trade goods such as the cases 
of gin and sacks of salt described by a visitor of the 1880s.64 
Pottery and dye industries late in Gezo's time were royal monopolies 
managed by the king's women. One group of women potters, for ex­
ample, were "married" by the king and settled south of Abomey to found 
a village, Avali, near rich clay pits. Along with other pots, they apparently 
made the small pipe bowls that were symbols of high rank at court. At 
least one other pottery factory existed to the north of the city during the 
same period.65 
As they had in earlier times, ahosi in the nineteenth century strung 
cowries; however, by the 1870S they were taking a much larger cut on 
their work. In the late eighteenth century, the women kept fifty cowries 
per head strung (each head being made up of fifty strings). By the 1870S 
they were keeping ten cowries per string, or five hundred cowries per 
head strung, a tenfold increase in profit.66 
State-sponsored prostitution, too, which had existed since very early 
times in Dahomey, also continued. It was regularly described as inexpen­
sive and widely available. Testimony from a family founded during the 
period of Gezo suggests that brothels dire<ted by wives of the king were 
established, possibly for the first time, during that period. The descen­
dants of a v.roman named Avloko, a wife of Gezo, say that she was sent to

--- Page 228 ---
The Implications of Cultural and Commercial Change 
2 1 1  
Whydah by the king to set up an establishment with 333 female slaves. "If 
a stranger came and he needed a woman, he could come to her house 
and find one. If strangers came and gave money, she IAvlokol would send 
it to Gezo. The children born in her house belonged to her." The wealth 
of Avloko in persons enabled her to establish her household as a lineage. 
Her heirs were the children of the women granted to her by Gezo. Ad­
ditional forms of prostitution also began to provide income and services 
for the monarchy. Visitors later in the century would complain that the 
king's women would seduce Europeans. When the women subsequently 
denounced them, the clients would be forced to pay large fines. The same 
process worked for hapless Dahomean men; rather than paying fines, 
though, the men would be forced to join the standing army.67 
Thousands of military unifonns were woven, dyed, tailored, and ap­
pliqued in Abomey during the nineteenth century. Men of the royal 
family appear to have done virtually all the work of weaving the local 
cotton into cloth, work that was the only manual occupation acceptable 
to male members of the Alladahonu lineage and one that continues to be 
monopolized by them. The dyehouses of the ahosi then created the in­
digo blues described by various visitors. Ahosi apparently also did much 
of the sewing and embroidery work. During the reign of GleJe, for ex­
ample, some 130 women of the royal sewing workshops were apprenticed 
to the Yemadje family specialists in applique.68 
Royal women's work was essential to the ceremonial cycle, too, which 
was doubled in length late in the reign of Gezo. The Annual Customs 
presented enormous problems of organization. Food had to be collected 
and prepared to feed thousands of persons over several weeks; treasures 
had to be removed from storage and women organized for the long 
processions of the wealth of the king; hundreds of women had to train 
to dance and sing praises; others prepared offerings to the ancestors. 
Burton, visiting in the early 1860s, observed women singing the exploits 
of Gezo and Glele. "Al is repeated 'by heart' and a tenacious memory is 
required. But the practice is hard. I rarely passed a palace when the king 
was out without hearing a loud singing lesson within."69 Storage alone 
within the palace would have been a monumental task by the mid­
nineteenth century. In addition to the fresh foodstuffs and currency that 
were collected as tax and tribute, and then partially distributed as part of

--- Page 229 ---
212 
The Implications of Cultural and Commercial Change 
the ceremonies, there was the vast royal treasury of gifts and imported 
goods that had accumulated over more than a century and that was 
brought out and paraded each year. 
In addition to all these activities with their direct implications for the 
well-being of the monarchy, women in the palace, as noted earlier, 
worked for their own accounts. Indeed, one of the responsibilities of the 
monarch-husband was to provide dependents of the monarchy with 
opportunities to enrich themselves and their own followers. At the most 
modest level, a small market existed on the northwest side of the palace, 
where ahosi or small servant-children of the palace would sell prepared 
foods and handicrafts made by the women within the palace walls. 
Sagbadju Glele, for example, a son of Glele who became head of the royal 
family in the mid-twentieth century, testified that his mother, in addi­
tion to her required royal duty of preparing the king's food, also wove 
mats that she sold through the palace market. "Every woman in the pal­
ace had an occupation. Some of them prepared balls of akasa [cassava 
flour cooked with water J, others fried yams into cakes, others were dyers 
of indigo. Little girls carried their products to the market to sel them. In 
the interior of the palace there was also a market where the women could 
come to do their own selling. Men were not allowed there."7°The mother 
of Sagbadju Glele typified large numbers of ahosi in the nineteenth cen­
tury in another sense: she was a Yoruba-speakiog woman captured in 
warfare in Egbado country-specifically, at the conquest of Okeodan in 
1848. Sagbadju h.imself was one of the sons of Glele who learned divina­
tion skills through training among his mother's kinsmen. 
Other women ahosi operated at a more lucrative commercial level. 
High-ranking women granted control over villages and plantations were 
said to have their agents at Whydah who traded 00 their behalf. One such 
woman was a wife of Glele, Tondove, who was a daughter of the Nyawi, 
one of the five ahisinon, or principal trading families, of Whydah. The 
life story recounted by one of her retainers suggests the hierarchical pat­
terns of interconnection and dependence among prominent individuals 
and families in late-nineteenthªcentury Dahomey. The informant was a 
Yoruba-speaking boy taken in war as a tiny child and granted to Tondove. 
When he reached an appropriate age, she gave him over to the care of

--- Page 230 ---
The Implications of Cultural and Commercial Change 
2 / 3  
Nugbodohwe, one of Glele's diviners. Nugbodohwe placed the young 
man in a trading apprenticeship under one Adohun Agbanu, a merchant 
who bought and sold oil and palm nuts for Tondove. Other prominent 
ahosi were similarly remembered as having had agents who traded for 
their accounts. Such women, and others like them, were also involved in 
finance. Freeman learned in the 1840S that Dahomeans could get loans 
from the palace through the offices of wives of the king. Visesegan, the 
favorite wife of Glele, was one of the richest women in the kingdom in 
the 1880s. In addition to building her wealth through her trading agents, 
she had control over the profitable practice of issuing conunercial li­
cences on behalf of the monarchy.71 
By mid-nineteenth century, then, the palace had expanded dramati­
cally, incorporating literally thousands ofDahomean and foreign women. 
As an institution, it constituted a complex community that reflected and 
consciously replicated the relations of class, status, and ethnicity of the 
kingdom as a whole. Militarily, it contained the elite corps of fighters, 
as it publicly cultivated and celebrated a national spirit of aggression. 
Economically, it promoted the interests of the monarchy even as it en­
riched select individuals at its higher levels. And the palace also embodied 
the ceremonial and political core of Dahomey. In the words of one of the 
most astute students of Dahomean life, "the palace of the king was the 
pivot of political life. In this sense, the Abomey palace was a microcosm 
of the kingdom as a whole." 71 Nevertheless, as we shall see, the palace at 
the moment of its greatest prominence and visibility also masked pat­
terns of growing exclusion from power for women and men of poorer 
classes. 
The Expansion of the Ceremonial Cycle 
By mid-nineteenth century, travelers and Dahomeans alike were com­
plaining about the extraordinarily long periods of time that they and 
thousands of others spent in Cana and Abomey participating in Customs. 
There is little evidence of precisely what motives prompted the monarchy 
of Gezo to extend the ceremonial cycle. Nevertheless, whether intended 
to or not, the longer ceremonies had a number of effects that may have 
proved valuable for the needs of the ruling coalitions of the nineteenth

--- Page 231 ---
214 
The Implicatfons of Cultural and Commercial Change 
century. First, they vividly demonstrated the devotion of the living to­
ward the dead. If anything could underscore the prosperity of the visible 
world to the invisible, it was the long and lavish ceremonies held in honor 
of the ancestors. Those ceremonies were intended to ensure the primacy 
of the Alladahonu in Kutome and to reinforce and strengthen the royal 
ancestors' ability to support their living descendants. In face of the realities 
of economic decline, extravagant honoring of the ancestors and associated 
vodun celebrated a fiction that was designed to recreate prosperity. 
Second, the extended ceremonial cycle kept large numbers of people 
occupied at court through long periods of time. A visitor to the court of 
Glele remarked that "people have no time for peaceful pursuits: war, war, 
war is alone thought of, and the King gives them no rest. Many of the 
chiefs complain of this, and seem heartily tired of it. . . .  They have no 
time to themselves: there is always some 'custom' going on, and hence 
the country is in a state of desolation, and the population is gradually 
decreasing." Customs demanded the presence in Abomey or Cana of vir­
tually all persons of significance in the kingdom. It th·us offered the mon­
archy the possibility of greater control over political rivals. Courtiers 
staying in Abomey could be closely watched and manipulated. Moreover, 
economic rivals of the dynasty, those owners and managers of coastal 
plantations, were less able to get on with their work. As a French trader 
grumbled, the constant celebrations at the capital were ruinous to com­
merce, preventing people from processing palm oil. n 
Third, Customs was a stage, a performance arena for the transmission 
of a variety of messages about the kingdom. Some were directed to the 
Dahomean citizenry itself, reminding them of the achievements of the 
kingdom, of its strength and invincibility. Others were meant to strike 
fear in the hearts of Dahomey's enemies and potential victims. Yet others 
were targeted to various European audiences. The Dahomeans under­
stood and played to the differing concerns of the British, French, and 
Portuguese, using Customs as an opportunity to argue their positions 
and an excuse to prolong or cut short negotiations with various envoys. 
During the era of Gezo, Customs was enlarged by the addition of at 
least two major ceremonial cycles: the so-called Oyo Customs, and the 
ceremonies performed in the name of Gezo before he was ens tooled.

--- Page 232 ---
The Implications of Cultural and Commercial Change 
2 I 5 
The Oyo Customs, which took place in Cana following the annual season 
of war, commemorated the freeing of Dahomey from the suzerainty of 
Oyo. They may have been instituted fairly early in the era of Gezo, shortly 
after the Dahomeans defeated Oyo in the early 18205. They appear to have 
included a reenactment of the presentation of the tribute to Oyo that the 
Dahomeans were forced to make at Cana for more than seventy years. In 
Dahomey's Oyo Customs, the tributewcarriers were Yorubawspeaking capw 
tives who were killed and whose bodies were later propped up on scafw 
folding and left holding samples of the products that had formerly heen 
sent to Oyo. 
The ceremonies performed in the name of Gezo as prince are not spew 
cificially mentioned in visitors' accounts prior to 1856, including in the 
detailed descriptions of Forbes. However, six years after Forbes's 1850 
visit to Abomey, Thomas Birch Freeman was present when the ato (platw 
form) ceremonies were performed twice, the fust time on behalf of the 
king and the second in the name of one Guarpay, "an imaginary personw 
age called the King's brother." Burton later used the term "bush king" to 
refer to this double of the king, whose name he transcribed as Gawkpwe. 
The name in fact is Gakpe. the name of Gezo before he was enstooled as 
king. Glele subsequently used the praisewname Addokpon for his imagiw 
nary self as prince. From the 1850S to the end of the kingdom, ceremonies 
were performed in the name of the kingwaswking. in the name of the 
kpojito, then in the name of the kingwaswprince, and finally in the name 
of the kpojito-as-ahosi. As Skertchly put it, "whatever is done for the king 
in public is thrice repeated; first for the Amazons, then for Addokpon, 
and thirdly, for Addokpon's Amazons." 74 
Scholars have debated the meaning of this innovation, which doubled 
the length of the central ceremonies that visitors had witnessed since the 
time of Agaja. Three major explanations for the kingwaswprince have 
emerged, none of which is wholly satisfactory. Proposed by Burton and 
echoed by Skertch1y, the first argues that. since it was beneath the dignity 
of the king to trade. the king-aswprince was created to aUow the king to 
be involved in commerce. to "take all the onus of ignoble trade, leaving 
the true monarch to rule over his subjects and spend his revenues." Later 
scholars, acknowledging that kings had regularly traded in slaves, have

--- Page 233 ---
2 1 6  
The Implications of Cultural and Commercial Change 
argued that the problem was simply trade in agricultural products. pre­
sumably a demeaning occupation for a warrior king. Thus when Gezo 
made the decision to begin to provide oil to the European market, he had 
to create a fictional being to trade on his behalf.75 
A second explanation, articulated first in 1954 by French scholar Paul 
Mercier, is based on the presumed importance of doubling and twinning 
in a Dahomean worldview. The king's double was an extension of the 
ideology that complements are necessary to achieve completeness­
visible and invisible worlds, women and men, Mawu and Lisa, migan and 
meu, city king and bush king. Mercier argues that Gezo and Gakpe were 
a "dual monarchy," modeled on twins who ruled together, King Akaba 
and his sister Hangbe.76 It is true that the house of Hangbe had been in 
eclipse during the one hundred years following Agaja's accession and that 
Gezo is credited with returning her descendants to respectability. How­
ever, Akaba and Hangbe had not ruled together, and in that sense were 
hardly a model for Gezo. Besides, the nineteenth-century kings were 
"doubled" by several other entities, including for example the kpojito 
and the royal vodun called tohosu. There would appear to be no particu­
lar reason to create this particular additional double for the king. 
I have argued a third explanation, that the king-as-prince helped 
to legitimate Gezo's position. Gezo was his predecessor Adandozan's 
brother. Because Adandozan had performed the lavish Grand Customs 
for their father, Gezo was unable to undergo the normal ful cycle of 
funerary/enstoolment ceremonies; instead, he demonstrated his legiti­
macy through reaffirming the devotion to the ancestors and loyalty to 
the dynasty that he had shown as a prince. By reminding Dahomey and 
the ancestors of his fealty and piety. he underscored the correctness of his 
position and effectively absolved himself of responsibility for his own 
coup d'etat. But legitimacy as the motive for the creation of ceremonies 
for the king-as-prince, as Robin Law and John Reid have pointed out, is 
also problematic. 77 We have no record of ceremonies in the name of 
Gakpe being performed prior to 1856. Why would Gezo feel a need to 
invent these ceremonies only in the 18505, after he had been in power for 
more than thirty years? 
The first argument, that the kings could not trade in agricultural prod­
ucts, remains the leading explanation for the doubling of the major cere-

--- Page 234 ---
The fmpffcations of Cultural and Commercial Change 
2 1 7  
monies of Customs by Gezo. Nevertheless, I find it unsatisfactory. Cer­
tainly, both Gezo and Glele repeatedly stressed to British envoys that 
Dahomey was in essence a military, not an agricultural, state. But that 
very insistence is troubling for two reasons. First, the kings do not appear 
to have protested that Dahomey was incapable of developing commercial 
agriculture to envoys of nations other than Britain. Second, there is no 
corroborating evidence retained in the oral traditions that suggests either 
that agriculture was a despised occupation or that the king could not 
trade in agricultural products. Only in European accounts, and specifi­
cally in statements of the kings made to British envoys at mid-nineteenth 
century, do we hear that Dahomey was a military nation whose people 
were not and could not be farmers. The numerous accounts left by 
French traders and missionaries of midcentury are oddly silent about the 
monarchy's attitude toward agriculture. Since many of those individuals 
were in Dahomey in order to promote commercial agriculture, one 
would expect them to have heard from the king that there were difficul­
ties for Dahomean production of palm oil. And the oral memory of the 
kingdom normally confirms or complements strong evidence from Eu­
ropean sources. We should expect to find some hint in oral traditions 
that it was inappropriate for the king to trade agricultural products. After 
all, there were a number of other prohibitions that surrounded the per­
son of the king. In the nineteenth century, for example, he was not per­
mitted to eat or drink in public. He could cross a body of water only on 
pain of death. And he could not be addressed by his name, but rather was 
greeted only with praise-names and honorifics. 
Freeman, the first to witness ceremonies in the name of Gakpe, pro­
vides an extended description of the meaning of the king-as-prince that 
points the way to a possible resolution of the problem. 
Guarpay . . .  is a kind of ideal representative of the genius of the 
nation. He takes the credit of al works of art which could not with 
propriety be attributed to the royal person. For instance, when I 
was in Dahomey in 1856, during a long day-interview with the late 
King, he showed me a neatly made blunderbuss, which he declared 
to be native manufacture, and it was so well executed that I was 
much surprised and interested. Not doubting the truthfulness of the

--- Page 235 ---
2 1 8  
The Imp{fcatlons of Cultural and CommercIal Change 
King's statement, I inquired by whose skills such an excellent article 
had been produced, and the royal answer was "Guarpay made it." 
From the manner in which the answer was given, I saw that there 
was some mystery about this Mr. Guarpay but I concealed my cu­
riosity until 1 could make further inquiry . . , and I . . .  learnt 
that . . .  the king could not say, without derogation from his dignity. 
"I made it." 
Both Burton and Skertchly later confirmed that the palace of the king-as­
prince enjoyed monopolies over several industries: the weaving of cloth 
for the king, the making of pipes and pottery, and the manufacture of 
mats?8 The functions of the king-as-prince, then, were broader than ag­
riculture and the trade in palm oil. In theory. virtually al of the economic 
activities of the palace organization were being credited to Gezo's Gakpe 
and later to Glele's Addokpon. As Freeman stresses in citing the king's 
"dignity," the king-as-prince set the king free of associations with the 
mundane economic activities of production and distribution or sale. This 
distancing of the person of the king from such workaday activities would 
have contributed to his aura of mystery. It would have been in keeping 
with the growing emphasis on the majesty of the person of the king. And 
it also meant that the king could deny his own complicity in the clandes­
tine trade in slaves. 
There are two possible cultural influences that could have been at work 
in prompting the Dahomeans to create a mechanism that would distance 
the king from common production. The first was the influence ofYoruba 
cuitwe, which, as we have seen, was having a particularly strong impact 
on the Fon at this period. The divine kings ofYorubaland lived in seclu­
sion, so separate from worldly activities that they almost never appeared 
in public. When they did, they were cloaked in mystery-their faces in­
visible, their words inaudible. The central symbol of the divine nature of 
the Yoruba kings was their veil of beads. Though the Dahomean kings 
were never seen by outsiders wearing such headgear. it is significant that 
a beaded crown of obvious Yoruba influence was one of Glele's personal 
possessions.79 
The second influence that may have helped to prompt the separation

--- Page 236 ---
The Implications of Cultural and Commercial Change 
2 1 9  
of the person of the king from economic activity was that of Europe, 
and Britain in particular. In the United Kingdom, the queen possessed 
great wealth, but never directly dirtied her hands in economic activi­
ties. Judging from descriptions of interactions between Dahomeans and 
Europeans, signals and quite possibly direct comments about the appro­
priateness of various activities to the dignity and majesty of a king were 
made by British visitors. For example, Gezo provided the explorer John 
Duncan with an ideal opening, asking that the Englishman "salute him 
as I would the Queen of England, for he was anxious to become ac­
quainted with European manners and customs."80 Travelers record in 
passing numerous incidents of Dahomean curiosity-questions about 
technical devices, medicine, foods, climate, clothing, social mores, and 
political systems. 
Running through the formal and informal exchanges that were re­
corded are odd glimpses of Europe refracted and reflected by Dahomean 
cultural lenses. An emblematic incident was described by Forbes and his 
colleague Arthur Fanshawe, who arrived one morning at the audience 
room of the king, only to find themselves assisting a woman they knew 
as Mae-hae-pah, the head of the king's daklo (women who conveyed 
messages between outsiders and the king). "The old lady was very busy 
winding up eight Sam-Slick docks! some upside down!! others on their 
sides, and one, by mistake, in its proper position." Forbes and Fanshawe 
assisted with the winding, setting times and arranging the clocks, and 
even carrying away for replacement a watch whose glass they had inad­
vertently broken. Like other travelers of the period, they clearly placed 
this incident in the category of technology misunderstood by the savage 
mind.'l Yet the placing of numerous timepieces in the audience room of 
the king suggests more. European visitors detested the long hours that 
they waited for ceremonies to begin and most probably lectured the 
Dahomeans on the virtues of punctuality and the need to adhere to the 
discipline of clocks. Clocks in the audience room where they waited 
were a Dahomean response that, ironically. mirrored European travelers' 
own preoccupations, as visitors from industrializing nations where life 
rhythms and meanings associated with time had been changing dramati­
cally over the preceding fifty years.

--- Page 237 ---
220 
The Implications of Cultural and Commercial Change 
Whether or not it was inspired by Yoruba or British notions of the 
need to separate a proper monarch from commonplace economic ac­
tivity, the creation of a king-as-prince had useful practical implications 
for the monarchy in negotiations with the British. From the 1840S to the 
1870S. British contacts with Dahomey were mainly on an official level, as 
a series of governmental missions were sent with two related demands 
that remained constant: that Dahomey cease slave trading and that the 
kingdom stop human sacrifice. When the monarchy stressed the impos­
sibility of doing either, the British offered to provide a temporary subsidy 
to replace the income lost in the abandonment of the slave trade. Two 
British missions at the end of the 1840S. including the one that Forbes 
accompanied, had as one of their goals the determination of the amount 
of income that the monarchy derived from the slave trade and the value 
of expenses incurred by the king during Customs. The British govern­
ment made several subsidy offers to Gezo, none of which approached the 
estimates provided by the envoys. 
Meanwhile, trade in palm-oil products. or "legitimate commerce," 
was growing along the coast. The most active European commercial pres­
ence was the French firm of Victor Regis, which set up shop in the old 
French slaving fort in Whydah in 1841. Regis agents were widely suspected 
of trading for slaves as well as oil, yet another indication of the relative 
compatibility between the two trades. A French envoy negotiated a treaty 
with Dahomey in 1851 that provided extremely favorable conditions for 
their trade and for the house of Regis in particular. Following the signing 
of Dahomey's treaty with France and the failure of British negotiations to 
stop the slave trade and to end human sacrifice. the British blockaded 
Whydah in September 1851. Within four months the Dahomeans agreed 
to stop the export of slaves, though Gezo refused to sign the full treaty 
that the British presented to him. When the Dahomeans continued to 
refuse to abolish human sacrifice, make peace with Abeokuta, or permit 
missionaries to settle in Abomey, the British finally relented and lifted 
the blockade in mid-1852. 
Recent historians have argued that the period from 1852 to the death 
of the king in 1858 represented a significant policy change. They maintain 
that the monarchy was sincerely cooperating with the British. pushing 
hard to promote the production of palm oil as a substitute for the trade

--- Page 238 ---
The Implications of Cultural and Commercial Change 
221 
in slaves. They note that Gezo personally ceased to ship slaves overseas 
and that he prohibited their export from Whydah. They claim that he 
continued to reduce the numbers of victims sacrificed during ceremo­
nies. a trend said to have begun in the 1840S. In response. a reaction­
ary party led by the heir apparent. Badahun (who became Glele when 
enstooled). is said to have opposed the changes and worked for a return 
to slave trading and increased human sacrifice. By 1857. the policy of 
cooperation of Gezo had effectively failed, and the king relented and 
resumed trading slaves. With the death of Gem in 1858 (which one his­
torian argues was by political assassination rather than an enemy bullet), 
the conservative party triumphed and reversed the gestures of concilia­
tion toward Britain.82 
However. there are other possible interpretations of this key period in 
the 1850S. The monarchy of Dahomey had far more at risk than did Brit­
ain as it contemplated the British demands. The Dahomeans clearly felt 
the economic reality of the drop in income with the falling off of the slave 
trade. Their interest in a subsidy, which they stressed long after the Brit­
ish had decided against such a cash indemnity. corresponds to a constant 
thread of concern expressed about royal revenues. Indeed, as late as the 
1870S. Glele was asking a British visitor if the mahogany grown near 
Abomey might be sold in EnglandY Certainly, there is evidence that the 
monarchy began to take palm-oil production seriously in the 1850S and 
actively embarked upon its cultivation and processing. Nevertheless. I 
would argue that throughout the years of negotiation with the British, the 
Dahomean position was constant: to look for alternatives to the slave 
trade, to negotiate, to encourage the British to pay a subsidy, and to trade 
in slaves to whatever extent was feasible. Why then did the monarchy of 
Gezo agree to a treaty in 1852. that committed the king to ending the slave 
trade? First, the king made dear the Dahomean interpretation of the 
terms of the treaty: that only the slave trade out of the port of Whydah 
was forbidden. Gezo argued in response to British protestations that he 
could control only goods shipped out of that port. Second, the king per­
sonally no longer traded slaves. Gezo. ever solicitous and cooperative to 
the British. could in al sincerity insist that he traded no slaves. Gakpe 
was another matter. 
Traders along the coast in the 1850S noted the activities of a prince they

--- Page 239 ---
222 
The Implications of Cultural and Commercial Change 
variously called Garpuay, Gampe, and Guerpay, whose base of operations 
was an embarkation point called Prya Nova (New Beach, in Portuguese), 
seven to eight miles west of Whydah. This prince, whose name was 
known by contemporary Europeans to be a pseudonym for the king, so­
licited ships to visit the new port, ostensibly to purchase palm oil. In 1857, 
however. when the British intercepted a shipment of slaves there, the 
"incident . . .  drove the King to fury and led to the punitive curtailment 
of all trade through ports under his sovereignty until the demanded rec­
ompense for the loss had been obtained from coastal traders."&4 Follow­
ing that occasion, the king's name was linked once again with slave trad­
ing from Dahomey. 
Gakpe, then, appears to have had multiple implications for the ritual 
and commerdal life of Dahomey. By relieving Gezo of all responsibility 
for economic activities, he helped to recreate the kingship on the model 
of European and Yoruba rulers, further distancing and mystifying the 
person of the king. He allowed the king to commit himself personally to 
the abandonment of the slave trade, yet not risk losing potential income 
should buyers appear along the coast. He further lengthened the long 
ceremonial cycle, allowing the monarchy to keep important persons in 
Abomey where they could be more easily managed. Moreover, the longer 
ceremonies could also have been expected to impress the British, who 
had studied the monarchy's expenses for ritual in the late 1840S. In the 
1850S the Dahomeans still hoped for a subsidy, and would have wanted 
to demonstrate to the British the need for a great deal of cash. Finally, 
Gakpe presented Dahomeans with reminders of their king before he was 
involved in the overthrow of Adandozan. As represented at midcentury, 
Gakpe was a law-abiding and peaceable man said to have been the real 
choice of his father to be king. Kept from power by the "evil" Adandozan, 
the noble king-as-prince busily pursued economic activities and suppos­
edly agreed to become king only reluctantly, in response to abuses of 
power by his predecessor . ..-

--- Page 240 ---
6 
The Decline of Dahomey 
The cultivated lands in the interior of Dahomey are superb and equal 
the best of European farming. 
Auguste Boul:!t, 1851, quoted by Nardin 
The last chapter explored five major changes of the age of Gezo. At 
least three of those changes-the influx of Yoruba-speaking peoples, the 
growth of the palace population, and the expansion of the ceremonial 
life of the kingdom-were instituted by the monarchy of Gezo but con­
tinued into the reign of Glele. Indeed. many trends of the nineteenth­
century state blend so continuously from one king's period to the next 
that they cannot be linked to a single monarchy. That is why I have cho­
sen not to use dates to separate the chapters that treat the monarchies of 
GezD and Glele. The theme of cuJtural and commercial change continues 
well beyond the end of the reign of Gezo, and decline begins long before 
Glele's enstoolment. In fact, the changing state policies of the nineteenth 
century in both kings' reigns can be linked to a broad tendency toward 
greater control from the center that became more and more prevalent in 
the life of the kingdom as the century progressed. The need for control 
in turn grew out of continuing political-economic crisis. 
Dahomey at mid-nineteenth century seemed visibly at its height. 
In the previous three decades. it had thrown off imperial Oyo, con­
quered large areas of Mahi country, threatened enemies to the southwest 
and southeast. and absorbed thousands ofYoruba-speaking captives and 
slaves. It was making a transition from slaving to commercial agricul­
ture. and European trading houses were competing for the red oil that 
promised future prosperity. The steady stream of European traders and 
diplomats called attention to the brilliantly colorful pageantry of Cus­
toms with their long public parades of the riches of the monarchy. Court 
223

--- Page 241 ---
224 
The Decline of Dahomey 
officials, including palace women, appeared in lavish dress that was con­
stantly changing, and women soldiers made astounding displays of mili­
tary prowess. But Dahomey at mid-nineteenth century was also fully 
engaged in a spiral of decline. Within fewer than fifty years, the people of 
Dahomey would see the destruction of the palace as spatial entity and 
human institution. They would watch the abolition of the office of king 
and the effective dismantling of the monarchy. French imperialism would 
end the independence of the kingdom, but Dahomey would be weakened 
long before the arrival of the French and Senegalese soldiers who accom­
plished the task of conquest. 
Even as the kingdom visibly gloried in its prosperity, the monarchy 
was losing a struggle to maintain standards of wealth from earlier eras. 
The dictum that each succeeding king was "to make Dahomey ever 
greater" rang hollow as the nineteenth-century monarchies struggled to 
keep even with, let alone surpass, the greatness of their predecessors. 
Power and growth were now inextricably tied to an international econ­
omy that no longer demanded the high-profit human commodity that 
had once helped the kingdom to prosper. With royal revenues dropping, 
and with economic opportunities increasing for Dahomeans who were 
not closely associated with the Abomey ruling elite, the monarchy re­
sponded with greater efforts to control the political life of the nation and 
to regulate the flow of economic resources. A kingdom that had been 
notable in the eighteenth century for order and discipline became one 
in the nineteenth in which the ruling authorities became obsessed with 
control: control over goods exported and imported, control over the pro­
duction and distribution of crops and locally made goods of every kind, 
control over spiritual entities and religious institutions, control over the 
physical movement of people, and control over the actions of potential 
and imagined enemies. By the 1880s, the monarchy's obsession with con­
trol had become so oppressive that Dahomeans were literally moving 
away from the center, migrating toward territory that fel outside the ef­
fective jurisdiction of the ruling dynasty. 
In the past, monarchies had been built of coalitions whose female 
and male members were drawn from the Alladahonu royal family, from 
common Dahomeans of the Abomey plateau, from peoples newly incor-

--- Page 242 ---
The Decline of Dahomey 
225 
porated into the kingdom, and from slaves and captives. With the dimin­
ished resource base of the nineteenth century, the composition of mon­
archies began to change. The royal family turned inward, increasingly 
excluding nonroyals from the wealth that created and supported power. 
Even as early as the accession of Gezo, brothers and sisters of the king 
were being brought into the monarchy. The trend intensified in the sec­
ond half of the century. With fewer resources, the Alladahonu chose to 
concentrate wealth in their own hands. As a son of Behanzin confided 
to me in the early 1970S, his father made a sister a minister "in order to 
make her rich." I Eventually, even the sisters of the ruling kings would 
find themselves shut out as the men of the royal family redefined power 
as something to be wielded only by men of royal blood. 
Meanwhile, the ritual life of the kingdom flourished. The paradox of 
increasing opulence and lavish ceremonial during a period of constantly 
contracting resources was one rooted in Fon culture. The power and ma­
terial success of the monarchy were attributable to the skillIuJ use of both 
supernatural and human resources. Dahomey had risen through con­
quest and trade, but only because of a combination of divine support and 
human endeavor. The ceremonies called Customs, and indeed numerous 
other events of the ceremonial cycle, were occasions for prayers of thanks 
and supplication. Supernatural beings, the most central of whom were 
the royal ancestors, were offered sacrifices of all that was necessary for 
the good life in Kutome: food and drink. slaves and servants, trade goods 
and animals. And the living shared in the thanksgiving. Dependents and 
followers of the monarchy-the people of Dahomey-received gifts for 
use in the visible world: cowries. food. goods. wives. slaves, and land. 
The relationship was mutually reinforcing on al sides. The welfare of the 
kingdom and the dynasty was dependent on the support of both the vis­
ible and the invisible; and the well-being of both the gods and the people 
of Dahomey was dependent on the continued expenditure of wealth by 
the monarchy. 
Unfortunately, the monarchy had less wealth to spend. The nineteenth 
century was an increasingly troubled period in Dahomey. The loss of 
income with the deterioration of the slave trade had been the beginning, 
and was arguably the root cause of decline. By the last decade of the age

--- Page 243 ---
226 
The Decline of Dahomey 
of Gezo, omens of various kinds were beginning to appear that for the 
monarchy signaled dissatisfaction on the part of the ancestors. Failures 
of policy and a loss of prosperity were followed over the years by defeats 
in warfare, by earthquake, and by premature and sudden deaths. Even 
the death of Gezo in 1858 would prove to be the fulfi1ment of a dark 
prophecy recorded by Forbes in 1850. Only one response offered relief: 
increased devotion as exemplified through more ritual and greater sacri­
fice. And ceremony, as we have already seen, also had secular impli­
cations. 
The New Militarism .-. 
European observers as early as the 1840S had remarked the centrality of 
ritual in Dahomey. Forbes charted the ceremonial calendar by month: 
war was made in December-January, followed by preliminary ceremo­
nies at Cana. The major ceremonies, which included the parading of the 
king's wealth. those traditionally called Customs, began in March. May 
and June saw rituals that were specifically associated with trade, including 
the throwing of gifts to crowds. The highlight of July was the gunshot 
relay to and from Whydah, when soldiers stationed at intervals of about 
250 yards all along the sixty-two miles from Abomey to the beach, taking 
their cues by ear, fired their guns in succession. the sound traveling to 
Whydah and back. Preparations for war took place in August and Sep­
tember, and a final round of ceremonies in honor of the ancestors of the 
king was reserved for the end ofthe year.2 
In fact, the succession of ceremonies varied far more than Forbes re­
alized, though certain portions of it were linked to the seasonal cycles of 
rainy and dry months. Judging from other accounts, the sole invariables 
by mid-nineteenth century were offerings to the royal ancestors, which 
came in December-January during the long dry season, and the annual 
war campaign, held immediately afterwards and completed before the 
beginning of the heavy rains in April. As in the Forbes list, May through 
July was typically busy with ceremonies, before a relatively quiet period 
in August-November. 
One of the most striking aspects of the descriptions of the ceremonial 
life of mid-nineteenth century was the way in which it combined an 
alternating rhythm of war and ritual. War to a great extent had be-

--- Page 244 ---
The Decline of Dahomey 
227 
come ritualized. and ritual had become militarized. Forbes remarked in 
1850 that "the time is . . .  yearly divided in war and festival." Burton simi­
larly said "the season of the Customs. which combine carnival, general 
muster, and lits de justice, seems to comprise the whole year, except the 
epoch of the annual slave-hunts, here dignified by the name of 'wars.'" 3 
During Gezo's reign, war became quite literally an annual affair, under­
taken only at a particular season, under particular conditions, and cir­
cumscribed by strict behavioral directives. Methods of warfare generally 
remained the same as before: the attempts to harness supernatural sup­
port, the techniques to neutralize the sources of enemies' power, the 
taking of war decisions based on a desire for vengeance, the use of ruses, 
and, toward the end of the century, a return to the use of foreign advisers. 
But there appears to have been an intensification of martial character­
istics of the previous era-a heightened desire to impress upon the 
people of the kingdom, upon their supposed enemies. upon the Euro­
pean nations that sent representatives to Customs, and upon the ances­
tors themselves that Dahomey was at h§art a militaristic state. 
Performance was central to the ritualized militarism of the nineteenth 
century. Some elements had been visible in some form in the eigh­
teenth-for example, the parading of armed women and the display of 
the skulls of sacrifice victims on the palace walls. By mid-nineteenth 
century. accounts often described items of personal royal regalia that 
were adorned with the crania of enemy chiefs and kings-possibly a tell­
ing symbol of the ideological move toward emphasis on the person of 
the king. Long sequences of belligerent song and dance began to be 
noted. And there were additional measures seemingly designed to terror­
ize. FoUowing his 1871 visit, Skertchly described a group of four men who 
were said to eat the flesh of sacrifice victims: 
(WJhen the captives are beheaded they take one of the bodies and 
cut off pieces of flesh, which they rub with palm-Oil, and roast over 
a fire kindled in the square before the platform. The human flesh is 
then skewered on the pointed sticks. and carried round the market­
place; after which the {men I parade before the State prisoners. and 
go through the action of eating the flesh. They chew the human 
meat before the terrified captives, but do not swallow it; and when

--- Page 245 ---
228 
The Decline of Dahomey 
they have worked upon the fears of the poor wretches . . .  they retire. 
and spitting out the chewed flesh, take strong medicine which acts 
as an emetic.4 
The women's army was the embodiment of nineteenth-century mili­
tarism and symbol of a nation bent on exhibiting its war-making capa­
bilities. Travelers had been witness to the parading of troops in the 
eighteenth century; in the nineteenth, visitors additionally watched sham 
battles and displays of the ferocity of the women warriors. Typical was 
the scene described by a French missionary in 1861. A mock fortified 
town had been built on a parade ground. The town was represented by a 
series of small buildings, which were protected behind a fifteen-foot-high 
houselike structure roofed with bushes bearing long, sharp thorns. which 
represented a walled rampart. Further outside stood a barrier of the same 
thorns, roughJy six fet high and eighteen fet deep. which represented 
an exterior protective bank. "According to the programe. the bare­
footed female warriors were to surmount three times the heap of thorns 
which represented the curtain of the works, descend into the clear space 
which took the place of the ditch, escalade the house, which represented 
a citadel bristling with defences. and go and take the town simulated by 
the row of huts. They were to be twice repulsed by the enemy, hut at the 
third assault they were to be victorious, and drag the prisoners to the 
king's feet in token of success. The first to surmount al the obstacles 
would receive from his hand the reward of bravery." The account goes 
on to describe the assault in detail. After approaching in a silent crouch, 
the women form a line of battle. The king gives them a rousing speech 
and sends them to the attack. "At a given signal, they throw themselves 
with indescribable fury upon the bank of thorns. cross it, leap upon the 
thorny house, retire from it as if driven back, and return three times to 
the charge-all this with such rapidity that the eye can scarcely follow 
them. They clamber over the thorny obstacles as lightly as a dancer vaults 
upon a floor I and that though their naked feet are pierced in all directions 
with the sharp thorns of the cactus." 
War was endlessly debated during the ceremonial cycles. A Dahomean 
historian has written that "war was not just a purely technical matter that

--- Page 246 ---
The Decline of Dahomey 
229 
was left to a simple victory of arms; nor was war a matter of mercenaries; 
rather, it was an essential activity in which al the constituent parts of the 
state took part." Targets of future campaigns were discussed, along with 
the leadership of the armed forces. Those said to have shown valor were 
honored, and cowards publicly humiliated. In the safety of Abomey, 
everyone was a soldier. Forbes noted during Customs in 1850 that "to­
day the whole nation was military; mother, wife, daughter, minister. even 
the hunchbacks and dwarfs, were strutting by in al the pride of military 
array." One of Forbes's entourage expressed astonishment to his journal 
"when in the midst of the Amazons stood the Royal Mother, wives, fe­
male Ministers, all in uniform and armed each with a musquet, sword 
and club and which each by her actions shewed she knew well to use." 6 
Companies were named for prominent individuals, and there were spe­
cific companies made up of princes and princesses. 
Eminent individuals "commanded" companies, but it is not clear that 
they necessarily led them in war, particularly late in the century. Nor 
is it clear that al the companies went into battle, and particularly the 
companies of members of the royal family. In the preceding chapter, we 
saw that some high-ranking women were active fighters, at least at mid­
century. In the 1870S, Skertchly claimed that "the higher the rank the 
person holds in the military scale the higher his position in everything." 
He said that the migan was, in addition to being prime minister, a "field­
marshal. and war captain-in-chief." Yet evidence suggests that Burton 
was more accurate in saying that the migan was commander "ex officio" 
of the army. Accounts of both attacks on Abeokuta credit the gau, not the 
migan. with leading the Dahomean forces. The two top-ranking profes­
sional military offices-those of the gau and the kpossu (posu)-had 
existed since at least the 1730S. Significantly, the gau, who in earlier eras 
had typically been listed among the five to seven most important minis­
ters, by the 1850S was no longer described as a member of the gbonugan 
daho (great chiefs of the outside). Skertchly called the gall a subordinate 
of the migan. Designating the gall as the migan's "lieutenant," he de­
scribed a debate about naming a new gall, with court officials debating 
the merits of the candidates' warrior skills? 
Descendants ofGJele and Behanzin insisted that no important person

--- Page 247 ---
230 
The Decline of Dahomey 
ever went into battle; rather, they argued, when songs were sung of the 
exploits of particular princes or princesses, the reference was only to 
the soldiers sponsored by those individuals. Similarly, one of the best­
remembered princesses ofBehanzin's court was Jikada, a sister to the king 
who was appointed gaunon (female counterpart to the gau). One of her 
nephews testified that she did not go into battle; nor for that matter did 
any sons of Glele. "Only wives and slaves made war." 8 On the other hand, 
the king in the nineteenth century "went to war." Yet sources make dear 
that he remained distant from any fighting. At times, the Dahomeans' 
enemies overran emplacements, capturing regalia of the king and mem­
bers of the court, and Gezo was mortaly wounded en route from a war 
campaign. Nevertheless, the pattern of the nineteenth century suggests 
that male ministers and members of the royal family were ceremonial 
warriors only, following the armed forces to war and carefully remaining 
at what they expected to be a safe distance. In contrast, as we saw in the 
last chapter, certain prominent women of the palace were in fact field 
commanders. 
What is suggested by the evidence is a gulf between the publicly ex­
pressed militarism of the court and the realities of warfare. The army­
in-performance and the army-in-the-field were increasingly two very 
distinct and different entities. The Dahomean forces on campaign con­
tinued to adhere to the old Gbe principles of war, and particularly to 
formulas of behavior long believed to be efficacious. Ruses and depen­
dence on supernatural support loom large in nineteenth-century ac­
counts of actual warfare, just as they had in the eighteenth. Success was 
mixed with failure, as it had been in earlier eras. Mahi country to the 
north was gradually conquered in the 1820S and 1830S. Later in the cen­
tury, the more common targets were Yoruba-speaking peoples to the east. 
Most often, successful war was made by surprise on large villages. The 
army was typically described as marching past its target then turning and 
making a surprise attack before dawn. With thousands of soldiers de­
scending on sleeping villages whose total population may have been fewer 
than the Dahomean forces, victory was assured. It was a ruse that enabled 
the Dahomeans to win their most decisive victory in the late nineteenth 
century-the destruction of the Yoruba city of Ketu. After beseiging the

--- Page 248 ---
The Decline of Dahomey 
231 
city for three months in 1886, the Dahomeans convinced the Ketu war 
leaders to leave the protection of their walls to negotiate an honorable 
surrender, only to have their army take the emissaries captive and storm 
the city. Similarly, near the end of the campaign against the French, the 
Dahomeans pretended to want to negotiate peace in an attempt to lure 
the French into an ambush.9 
Judging from accounts of war itself, only the women soldiers fulfiled 
in battle the promise they exhibited in ceremony. Forbes tells of an 1840 
attack against Atakpame, whose inhabitants he calls the Attahpahms. By 
his account. the city had been forewarned and all fled, save " 400 reso­
lute men [who] kept the Dahomeans in check. killed many, put the males 
to the rout, and had it not been for a rally of the amazons, would 
have discomfited the Dahomean army." Occasionally. the Dahomeans 
were the victims of ruses. As their army approached Abeokuta in early 
March 1851. an Egba chief at lshagga. some twelve miles from the enemy 
target, surrendered his town. Fooled by the surrender into believing that 
the town supported them. the Dahomeans followed the chief's "advice" 
and waited until daylight to cross the shallow Ogun River to attack the 
only section of the Abeokutan fortifications that had been reinforced. 
Twelve years later. the Dahomeans set out to avenge their earlier defeat 
at Abeokuta, but turned back within sight of the city when Glele dreamed 
that a royal spirit had warned him not to attack but to return the follow­
ing year, when war would be made successfully. \'Vhen they returned a 
year later. the Dahomean army went via a tortuously convoluted route, 
in the belief that a twenty-two-day indirect march to arrive at a city some 
110 miles from Abomey would permit them to surprise the Egba. The 
exhausted and hungry Dahomean troops. estimated at ten thousand, 
were beaten back at the ramparts of Abeokuta and were then pursued 
and attacked for two days during their retreat. Their estimated losses were 
more than 2,200 dead to 50 killed on the Egba side. The only Dahomean 
soldiers to have broken through the city defenses were four women. IQ 
If warfare itself had changed little, why did Dahomey become more 
militaristic at mid-nineteenth century? The answer, it seems. lay in the 
change to a commercial agricultural economy. Paradoxically, a cult of 
militarism was unnecessary while the monarchy was able to monopolize

--- Page 249 ---
232 
The Decline of Dahomey 
and channel the armed forces of the kingdom into the production of 
slaves. However, the production of palm products left the central mon­
archy at a distinct disadvantage; a rigidly organized central government 
was unnecessary for the cultivation of oil palms by individuals, and 
wealthy men and women controlling coastal plantations could more 
easily cultivate, process, and transport oil and kernels to ports of em­
barkation. In short, the celebration of militarism underscored what the 
monarchy of Dahomey had been uniquely equipped to do and denied 
the realities of changing economic and political orders that would in­
creasingly be concentrated at the coast. Militarism set the ruling elite 
above other Dahomeans, emphasizing their distance from and disdain 
for work in agriculture. Ritualized militarism was a kind of perfonnance­
prayer, offered in order to create in Kutome a world that would then be 
reified in Gbetome, the visible world. In that invented world, as in the 
Dahomey of old, the kingdom would prosper through the conquest and 
capture of enemy popuJations. Implicitly, it included a vision of a return 
to a flourishing slave trade. 
Burton expressed what he heard in Abomey when he noted that "agri­
culture is despised. because slaves are employed in it." 11 Yet contempo­
rary members of the royal family point out that royal grants of land and 
slaves meant that every important person was a farmer, at least in the 
sense of a gentleman farmer whose wealth was linked to the product of 
his or her estate. Moreover, twentieth-century oral traditions about Gezo 
before he became king claim that he lived near Cana, spending his time 
in farming and hunting. Granted, these traditions may have been created 
at a point when commercial agriculture had become a more valued way 
of life for members of the royal family; nevertheless, sources dating back 
as far as the early eighteenth century insist that in Gbe-speaking areas, 
potential kings lived far from court on estates granted them by their fa­
ther. अ we wil see below, these contradictory signals about agriculture 
may well have been associated with the midcentury representation of the 
kingdom to outsiders, and particularly to the British. 
Ritual presented Dahomey as prosperous, rich. and militari.ly invin­
cible. It gloried in the military victories of the past and in ceremonies 
designed to reorder present realities. Historians have been able to discern 
some of the internal struggles in Abomey over responses to the demands

--- Page 250 ---
The Decline of Dahomey 
233 
of European powers and the growth of imperialism. Militarism as a re­
sponse was backward-looking. But in retrospect. it is apparent that mod­
ernizing and fully cooperating with agents of change could not have saved 
the kingdom in the long run. 
Surveillance and the Palace ,.::",. 
Europeans and Afro-Brazilians from the coast pronounced the expanded 
ceremonial cycle an onerous innovation harmful to the economic inter­
ests of themselves and the kingdom. Yet more ceremonies were but one 
of a number of changes toward increased centralization that Dahomeans 
must have found burdensome. In the second half of the nineteenth cen­
tury. governmental dominance tightened and widened. Taxes increased. 
physical mobility decreased, and controls over virtually all aspects of life 
became the norm. Checks and counterchecks on anyone of substance 
seemed to multiply along with a sense of collective paranoia. Controls 
were administered through officials, both inside and outside the palace 
organization, who themselves were subject to new demands and extra 
surveillance. Along with closer control was a steady trend toward the 
consolidation of power and wealth in the hands of members of the royal 
lineage, and particularly the hands of princes. 
Royal revenues were a first concern. If palm oil was to replace lost 
revenues from the slave trade, it had to be made to pay. The terms of 
trade remained highly favorable to the king and favored officials, the 
members of the monarchy. Beyond that, the concentration on palm-oil 
production in the 1850S prompted a series of new exactions: exporters 
paid the monarchy one gallon of palm oil for every eighteen that they 
sold to the European factors. An older, in-kind tax on all kinds of agri­
cultural produce, the kuzu, was turned into an annual payment that had 
to be submitted in the form of palm oiL In a move apparently aimed at 
the prosperous coastal palm-oil producers, a new and powerful court 
officer, the tavisa, was named to collect the kuzu in the area of Whydah. 
The preoccupation with revenues generated by commercial agriculture 
led to attempts to control what was grown and where. not just to favor 
oil palms, but also to discourage or even forbid crops like shea butter, 
peanuts, coffee, sugarcane, tobacco. and rice.12 
As in the past. small payments were exacted. again and again, on

--- Page 251 ---
234 
The Decline of Dahomey 
travelers and their goods. Customs houses were virtually everywhere, at 
the entrances and exits to towns, along the lagoons, and at gated roads. 
Skertchly described one such toll house. 
A quarter of an hour's walk through the plantations brought us to 
the Denurn, a more imposing structure than any we had hitherto 
seen. The road was crossed by a fence of six-foot poles, crowned by 
a vigorous growth of shoots. In the centre was an opening about six 
feet wide, through which every traveller must pass. It is the custom 
for the caboceers, when sending any of their servants on a journey, 
to furnish them with a stick carved with the heraldic insignia of the 
owner and a number of cowries or other small articles denoting the 
number of persons this primitive passport allows to accompany 
the principal messenger. This permit is carefully scrutinized by the 
Denum keeper, and woe betide the unlucky wight who is detected 
in trying to pass without due authority.l3 
Tax "farmers" collected funds from all who passed such customs houses. 
They kept a portion and passed the rest of their revenues along to a cabo­
ceer or other official. who similarly kept some and passed the remainder 
along to the monarchy. Fees were col1ected at markets on everything sold. 
Collectors kept a portion and took the remainder to Abomey. 
Earlier visitors had reported that every able-bodied person paid a per­
sonal tax annually. In the nineteenth century, the personal tax appears 
to have been proportionately heavier, and the expected total amount of 
personal tax was calculated through a census taken each year, the results 
of which were guarded in the palace at Abomey. Nevertheless, the sums 
paid were negotiated, at least quietly, and Le Herisse was told that the 
royal coffers often did not get their due. As in the past, the estates of all 
deceased persons of any wealth were inherited by the king, who had the 
right to keep any portion of the goods. Even if nothing was retained. the 
slate received other additional payments in cash and kind on the death 
of persons of any substance.14 
The greater one's wealth, the greater was one's vulnerability in 
nineteenth-century Dahomey. Though fears of loss of control over the 
palm-oil trade may have prompted the dose supervision of some indi-

--- Page 252 ---
The Decline of Dahomey 
235 
viduals, the concern for control was generalized throughout society. 
Everywhere were people charged with watching others, informers whose 
job it was to bear witness to the relative honesty of others. No one was 
trusted, and offices became layered with levels of assistants responsible 
for checking on the behavior of others. The legede, the special messengers 
created at the end of the eighteenth century to assure proper delivery of 
messages between ambassadors, were commonly dubbed "secret police" 
in the nineteenth. By Burton's day, the ranks of the legede had been 
greatly expanded, and a legede-a "spy, or to use a more delicate term, 
'second in command' "-was assigned to watch virtually every major of­
ficial. Burton comments sourly that "if a captain is sent to prison, he 
must be accompanied by his Legede, who prevents the wives sending 
food, and who is answerable for the sentence being carried out in its 
strictness." 15 
Two groups whose positions were synonymous with wealth and power 
were particularly susceptible to suspicion: the merchants at Whydah, 
both the Dahomeans and those who made up the Afro-BrazHian com­
munity, and the highest officials in the kingdom outside the palace, the 
gbonugan daho (literally, the great chiefs of the outside). The merchants 
found themselves subject to denunciations and to arbitrary policy deci­
sions that could easily harm their commerce; the great chiefs, who had 
always before constituted the core of the monarchy, found that decision 
making and policy implementation during the reign of GleJe as often as 
not were entrusted to others. 
As palm oil grew to be the favored export and the item most pro­
ductive of revenue for the monarchy, oil was literally treasured. Unlike 
slaves, whose bodies represented an indivisible commercial value and 
who would have been able to testify to irregularities in their treatment, 
small quantities of palm oil were relatively easy to pilfer. Penalties for 
theft were severe. Skertchly witnessed brutal floggings given to men 
convicted of having stolen "some of the King's palm oiL" Higher on 
the social scale, the ahisinon, traders licensed by the palace, seem to 
have been a particular target of suspicion, whether justified or not. The 
"breaking" of a household for crimes against the monarchy is attested as 
early as the seventeenth century in Whydah. Individuals said to be guilty

--- Page 253 ---
236 
The Decline of Dahomey 
of crimes against the state had all their goods confiscated and their imme· 
diate family members dispersed as slaves by the monarchy. Such became 
the fate of certain nineteenth·century ahisinon. For example, a descen· 
dant of the Whydah·based family of Codjia told me of his ancestor being 
taken to Abomey during the time of Glele because some "tattlers" had 
reported that he was not sending all the money that he should to the 
king. The entire household and all moveable goods were carried off to 
Abomey, where the descendant's mother was given to the vidaho, Kondo, 
as a slave wife. She returned to Wbydah only "after the war," that is, after 
the French conquest. According to Codjia's descendant, having one's 
house broken and being sent off to Abomey was a common occurrence 
for ahisinon in the nineteenth century. Forbes similarly spoke of the con· 
straints on Isidore de Souza, the heir of the de Souza family and son of 
the original chacha, who was supervised by six: superintendents of trade 
who reported directly to the king. They were seconded during the chap 
cha's "hours of recreation" by "ladies of the blood royal," who also re· 
ported to the king. Burton described Isidore's successor, Chicou, as an 
official "surrounded by the cleverest spies and councilors." Moreover, by 
the early 1860s Glele had appointed a prince, Chyodotan. to a position 
as "assistant" to the yovogan of Whydah, one of the gbonugan daho and 
the kingdom's minister of commerce. Chyodotan overshadowed virtually 
everyone in Whydah, becoming the central figure along the coast who 
supervised trade and, as the imperial threat grew in the 1870S and 1880s, 
serving as a chief Dahomean envoy for negotiations with the European 
powers. 16 
The gbonugan daho typically included five to seven male officials, all 
of whom were effectively part of the monarchy. Their ranks from the 
mid-eighteenth century onward always included the migan, or prime 
minister, the meu, or second minister, the yovogan, chief for the whites, 
and the ajaho, variously called a minister of religion or chief of the se· 
cret police. Beyond those four central posts, sources differ as to which 
titled officials made up the ranks and how many were considered to be 
gbonugan daho, as opposed to lower.ranking chiefs and caboceers, at 
any given momentY All sources do agree on three points about the 
nineteenth century, however. First. numerous persons-princess·wives.

--- Page 254 ---
The Decline of Dahomey 
237 
legede, princely and commoner assistants-were attached to the house­
holds of the gbonugan daho to oversee their performance; second, over 
time larger numbers of men of the royaJ family, and particularly brothers. 
sons, and grandsons of the nineteenth-century monarchs, were named 
to positions as gbonugan daho; and third, one of the most prominent 
of the gbonugan daho was the ajaho. The ajaho's prominence appears 
to have been related to his functions as the official who dealt with the 
boundaries between the inside and outside, and specifically with the flow 
of information to the king and monarchy. Supervisor of spies, both do­
mestically (Iegede) and outside the kingdom (agbadjibeto), the ajaho also 
decided who might be present in audiences with the king and had over­
al responsibility for the eunuchs within the palace. In the nineteenth 
century, he became the official responsible for the formal supervision of 
religious activities, which, as we will see, became a cornerstone of eforts 
at control over the population. 
European visitors regularly commented on their own experiences with 
royal surveillance. Duncan reported that a male ahosi was sent on an 
expedition north with him in 1845. Though the man's usual job was "to 
report, by private messenger to the King, any misconduct or neglect of 
the superior officers," in Duncan's case the ahosi was assigned to receive 
any complaints that the Englishman might have against his Dahomean 
escort or against any of the chiefs or caboceers in any towns through 
which he passed. Abomeans claim that servants offered by Glele to visi­
tors were in fact eavesdroppers in the service of the monarchy who 
knew various European languages and collected intelligence. The oral 
memories are corroborated by written accounts of the late nineteenth 
century. A Frenchman who lived in Whydah in the late 1880s saw Chacha 
de Souza warn Europeans leaving for Abomey that "above al, what ever 
happens or what ever you see, not a word, not a comment between you 
in any language; if you want to chat, go into open fields, and even then 
beware!" lĹ 
Europeans appreciated the small private audiences that Gew and Glele 
granted them as opportunities to speak more openly and frankly with the 
king. The French visitor Repin reported that Gezo received private visi­
tors in the quarters of his favorite wife. A map sketched at the period

--- Page 255 ---
238 
The Decline of Dahomey 
shows the house of this unnamed wife adjacent to a palace gate that stood 
opposite the residence of the meu, where European visitors were nor­
mally lodged. Burton similarly met Glele in a private audience in the 
palace. The king "was attended by six of his Privy Council .
.
.
 also by five 
of his principal wives." We do not know where Burton was received in 
the palace, but we may speculate that it was in the house of Visesegan, 
Glele's favorite and most powerful wife, because we know that the king 
had a door cut into the wall behind his public reception room so that he 
might easily approach her quarters. Skertchly, too, met in private audi­
ences with Glele and his heir. At his final audience, the king sat "under 
a long shed . . . .  The English landlady [the "English mother" described in 
Chapter 5] and [the king's] Leopard-wives surrounded him, with a few 
Dahkros [daklo]." Interpretation in these private audiences was a crucial 
issue for both sides. Europeans were often concerned that they be able to 
hire an independent and trustworthy interpreter on the coast to travel 
to Abomey with them, and they insisted that he be the one used in con­
versations with the king. But the Dahomeans, too, took precautions. A 
grandson of Glele testified that "in the palace there was a woman who 
spoke French, another who spoke English. When a stranger came, the 
male interpreter would interpret, and the woman would sit beside the 
king as a check, If al was properly done, she would tell the king after 
their departure." 19 
The pattern of a palace woman present as listening ear and memory 
bank extended beyond private audiences with Europeans and beyond the 
interpretation of foreign languages; it was part of the general oversight 
characteristic of the late nineteenth century. Edouard Chaudoin, a French 
factor resident in Whydah in the 1880s commented. for example. that 
"the wives of the king play a considerable part in the politics of the coun­
try; they attend councils. and their opinions weigh heavily with the king. 
They are the ones who remind him of certain facts and whisper his 
speeches to him or his addresses to the chiefs and people." 20 The visibility 
of women in these roles at court and the belief that women were influ­
ential in matters of state raise interesting but difficult questions about 
women and their changing position in nineteenth-century Dahomey. 
In the past, certain high-ranking ahosi and some women of the royal

--- Page 256 ---
The Decline of Dahomey 
239 
family had clearly been a part of the monarchy. Evidence from the eigh­
teenth century shows that women in the palace were directly involved 
in succession struggles. Princesses had been deeply involved in building 
Dahomey and strengthening the royal lineage. Women were still visible 
and active in discussions of policy questions at mid-nineteenth century. 
Indeed. women's open participation in court discussion was so corrunon­
place that Forbes. who came from a society where women might reign 
as head of state but not govern as members of Parliament, found it un­
remarkable. Freeman reported that judidal appeals from districts were 
heard in Abomey by a council that included "the two chief ministers of 
the state and the chief leaders of the Amazons. In all such cases, however, 
the latter are considered to have the greater influence: it being a leading 
feature of Dahomean polity that in the counsels of the King the female 
sex have the ascendant." An appellant would sek the king's ear through 
"the chief ladies of the court." Despite severe prohibitions for men to 
have contact with ahosi. such approaches to the palace could easily be 
made through the palace women's female relatives. who were allowed free 
access,21 
Yet as time passed, women, both commoner and royal, more and 
more became the instruments of control over others and less and less an 
active part of the monarchy. Real power became concentrated elsewhere. 
Their changing position by the late nineteenth century is suggested by 
Gedegbe. one of Glele's chief diviners, who reminisced that the king re­
ceived visitors in his audience room "surrounded by some of his wives. 
When an important matter was to be discussed, he made them leave." In 
early 1890. in the midst of Behanzin's first major crisis with the French, 
the king held a secret audience at 3:00 A.M. for eight Frenchmen who had 
been taken hostage. One later described the scene, noting the presence of 
"five very fine-looking black women attendants" and the royal coundl, 
"two rows of caboceers," kneeling on either side of the king.ll The impli­
cation is that the council was exclusively male. Nevertheless, there is 
evidence of the importance of women as listeners. if not active partici­
pants, in state discussions. 
An elaborate gendered system of dual offices, which claimed its origins 
in the reign of Tegbesu. was strikingly apparent to virtually all mid- and

--- Page 257 ---
240 
The Decline of Dahomey 
late-nineteenth-century visitors. Male-female pairs of officials ranged 
from the very highest offices of the kingdom down to relatively low­
ranking positions. At the top, every member of the gbonugan daho was 
doubled by a woman within the palace. The man held the ministerial title 
and the woman within the palace had a comparable title with the suffix 
-non, meaning "person charged with responsibility for," or "mother of." 
Thus, the male prime minister was the migan; his female counterpart 
was the miganon. Similarly, the second highest-ranking officials were 
the meu and meunonj and the yovogan was doubled by the yovoganon. 
Sources agree that the female counterpart had to be present whenever the 
male minister appeared at court, and some have argued that these high­
ranking women "were nearly equally important as the ministers."23 
But beyond being present when her cOWlterpart reported at court, it 
is not dear precisely what functions these female ministers performed. 
Their roles have been debated by scholars. Logically, there would seem to 
be a contradiction in appointing ahosi who were physically inside the 
palace to titled positions paralleling the gbonugan daho, who performed 
functions on the outside. Some have argued that the women officials in 
fact had little to do with their counterparts' functions; rather, they simply 
had corresponding responsibility within the palace for functions dis­
charged outside by the male officials. who could not be permitted to have 
jurisdiction over women inside. Thus, as the migan was the chief execu­
tioner of the outside. the miganon was responsible for executing con­
demned criminals within the palace population. An alternative expla­
nation supported by the preponderance of evidence is that the women 
officials provided a check or control over the male officials' activity. In­
deed, women who were counterparts to the great chiefs of the outside, as 
well as a number of lower-ranking women counterparts to other male 
officials of the outside, appear to have performed both oversight and 
advocacy roles. For example, a grandson of GleIe argued that the envoys 
of the yovogan carried goods and revenues to the palace, handing them 
over to the yovoganon, who was responsible for accounts and reports to 
the king.24 
We have a relatively large amount of evidence about palace women's 
relationships with outsiders for lower-level offices. Forbes, for example, 
argued that every soldier was doubled: "[Tlhe same equivalent rank is

--- Page 258 ---
The Decline of Dahomey 
241 
carried down to the private in each brigade, male and female. These re© 
lationships in military rank are called father and mother; and, as wil 
appear, the male soldier, when accused. appeals to his 'mother' to speak 
for him." He similarly describes Yewe. the "English mother" whom we 
met in chapter 5. However, while Forbes and other English©speaking visª 
itors tended to see such women as titde more than hostesses for foreign© 
ers, French agents attributed greater influence to them. A midcentury 
French trader claimed that the "European mothers" cared for the well© 
being of their charges but also acted as intermediaries with the king: 
"These mothers are generally very influential on the thinking of the 
king." Chaudoin similarly explained that each of the European commer« 
cia! establishments at Whydah was represented at court by a woman, who 
"is responsible for defending the interests of her charge before the king 
when circumstances require it." 25 
Using the example of the yovogan, Melville Herskovits posits a com© 
plex system of checking and counterchecking by the women who par¬ 
alleled the gbonugan daho within the palace. The "mother" of each male 
minister was responsible for hearing and remembering the reports of her 
counterpart as well as remembering the accounts of other individuals 
from the outside assigned to survey the minister's work. The "mothers" 
were in turn controlled by a body of women known as the kposi. Drawing 
on testimony describing the reign of Behanzin, Herskovits claims that 
there were twenty­four kposi divided into three groups of eight each. 
Eight were present whenever anyone reported anything before the king; 
they were the overall memories of the court and their word "was final 
when a statement was in dispute." Another eight kposi were responsible 
for remembering reports of the various chiefs, while the third group of 
eight was charged with remembering the accounts presented by priests. 
Herskovits's scheme is not direcdy corroborated elsewhere, though it 
resonates with the memories of an elderly Yoruba woman, a fanner pal¬ 
ace slave, who was interviewed in Nigeria by the anthropologist WiIliam 
Bascom in 1951. She recalled three separate, very high©ranking groups of 
eight women each: the kposi, the hudohwe, and the hume. The most 
senior were the kposi, or great wives, followed by the other two and then 
by the lower ranks of palace women. U 
Herskovits's description, even if not fuly corroborated, certainly un«

--- Page 259 ---
242 
The Decline of Dahomey 
derscores other evidence that the women within the palace had some 
responsibility in the late nineteenth century for surveillance of the men 
who worked in the administration of the kingdom outside the palace. The 
Herskovits passage is significant too, for its suggestion of political roles 
for the kposi, who otherwise are seen in the literature as wholly holy 
women, It points to a possible understanding of the kposi as extensions 
of the entity of the king. the king himself being both man and mythical 
animal, a living person and an embodiment of the spirits of all the pre­
vious kings, Like other words incorporating the suffix -si. kposi indicates 
someone dependent upon, a subordinate to, or wife of Kpo, As we saw 
in chapter 2, kpo in Fongbe means leopard, and the sacred Jeopard Kpo 
had associations both with the ancestry of the intrusive Alladahonu rul­
ing lineage and the people acknowledged as the original owners of the 
Abomey plateau, In the context of Dahomean religious life, then, the 
term kposi suggests adepts of a cult dedicated to the vodun Kpo, 
The kposi are not mentioned in eighteenth-century sources, though 
that does not necessarily mean that they were not present within the pal­
aces of earlier kings. Later sources, however, are consistent in drawing 
attention to their special rank. le Herisse, for example, says that the wives 
of the king were divided into two distinct categories. "the Kposi, wives of 
the leopard, and the Ahosi, wives of the king." He adds that the kposi 
"enjoyed a privileged position in the harem. They lived in the section 
reserved for the king, and had no other job than to surround their mas­
ter. silent and attentive to his least desires." No one was permitted to 
speak to kposi, who were preceded everywhere they went, even in the 
palace, by servants who would cry, "Look out!" or "Move aside!" Simple 
ahosi passed kposi with lowered heads.27 
Mid-nineteenth-century visitors saw kposi in processions and typi­
cally made two observations: that they numbered well under a dozen 
and that they were extraordinarily well-dressed. Forbes, for example, de­
scribed six kposi ofGezo "dressed most magnificently in scarlet and gold 
tunics, slashed with green silk and satin, with sashes and handkerchiefs 
of silk, satin, and velvet of every colour; coral and bead necklaces, silver 
ornaments and wristbands." Burton and Skertchly each saw eight, rather 
than six, elderly women who were identified as Gezo's "leopard wives,"

--- Page 260 ---
The Decline of Dahomey 
243 
Both were impressed with the sight of the eight kposi of Glele, whom 
Skertchly called the king's favorite wives and Burton praised as "the 
youngest and fairest of the harem." 28 Distinguished by their finery and 
their distance from others, the kposi appeared at court "each under her 
own state umbrella of gorgeous hue. They were dressed in green and blue 
silk, richly embroidered with gold lace, and glittered in the sun in the 
profusion of their ;ewelry of silver and coral. All wore a string of silver 
ornaments round their heads, which contrasted well with their dark 
skins, and the royal coiffure of a turban-like tuft on the top of the head 
was combed and pomatumed to perfection." 2,} Except for agreeing that 
they were separate, special, and sacred, there is no consensus among the 
written sources or the oral testimonies about the kposi's functions. Paul 
Hazourne says they were the biological mothers of potential heirs; de­
scendants in the royal family disagree. Herskovits says that they super­
vised the ahosi; descendants in the royal family again disagree. The seg­
regation of the kposi from others and their sacred status, however, point 
the way to a possible interpretation of their importance, at least in the 
nineteenth century. 
The kposi underwent an initiation process in the palace to become 
vodunsi ofKpo, and are described as having on occasion worn the beaded 
crowns associated with the Yoruba sacred monarchies. One descendant 
of GJe1e claimed that they became agasusi, initiated followers of the 
leopard-totem of the royal family, on the death of the king who had made 
them kposi. Symbolically, as adepts of the leopard that linked the ances­
try of the royal lineage with the original owners of the land of Dahomey, 
the kposi represented the dual character of the social covenant that le­
gitimized Alladahonu rule. However, the kposi's separation from contact 
with virtually all persons but the king had political implications, too. 
Though they were dedicated ritually to a sacred being who embodied the 
royal/commoner and intruderllandowner accommodation that legiti­
mized the dynasty, they in fact were women absolutely under the control 
of only one person, the man who represented one-half of that equation­
the king-and they were said by at least one source to have had to die 
with him.30 In contrast to the pairing of the king and kpojito that em­
bodied the ethos of the eighteenth century, and that also symbolized the

--- Page 261 ---
244 
The Decline of Dahomey 
fundamental social contract, the closeness of the kposi to the person of 
the king and the access that he alone had to them suggests a shift toward 
emphasis on the king and his personal power. The prominence of the 
kposi. who unquestionably were in close public and private attendance 
on the king, can be read as an extension of the aura of mystery that in­
creasingly surrounded the person of the monarch. At the same time, the 
kposi offered very real and practical possibilities for playing the role that 
Herskovits attributes to them. Silent yet present. indissolubly tied to 
the king himself and loyal to him alone, the kposi were extensions of 
his intelligence and consciousness, and they were very likely aids to his 
thinking and decision making. Yet their lack of autonomy and recognized 
authority hint at significant changes in the ability of women to exercise 
autonomous power in the kingdom, in changed conceptions of appro­
priate gender roles, and in controls over women in Dahomey. 
Daughters of the king and other princesses are also linked to 
nineteenth-century eforts to control the people of Dahomey, and par­
ticularly to control individuals of high rank. We saw in chapter 2 that 
princesses in the early years of the kingdom were prominent politi­
caly, participating directly in events that established their lineage's pre­
eminence on the Abomey plateau. Children born of princesses became 
members of the royal family, and marriages between siblings who were 
not born of the same mother were allowed within the royal lineage. Both 
of these deviations from patrilineal patterns practiced by commoners in 
Dahomey may have functioned to maintain solidarity within the royal 
family and to allow it to grow relatively quickly. However, princesses' 
relative autonomy and ability to play central roles within their lineage, 
and by extension within the kingdom's political system, were contracting 
in the late nineteenth century. 
Despite their political prominence and high social rank, the status of 
princesses was anomalous in Fon culture. A commoner wife who had 
been married with ful payment of bridewealth ideally spent most of her 
adult life in the household of her husband. If she won the respect of his 
kin and was skilled in negotiating the shoals of lineage politics, she could 
assist her own children to reach lineage leadership positions and might 
be honored as an ancestor in her husband's family. In contrast, within

--- Page 262 ---
The Decline of Dahomey 
245 
the families of their husbands, princess-\.V:ives, whose children were affili­
ated elsewhere, were assumed to have undivided loyalty to the royal lin­
eage and were not integrated into their marital lineages. Typically, prin­
cesses established a separate household with the slaves and gifts that their 
father presented to them at the time of their marriage. Their children 
were royalty, yet they were curiously disadvantaged, being ineligible for 
lineage office in the AlIadahonu line. Finally, princesses could not be 
punished for adultery, which meant that they, like men in Fon society, 
controlled their own sexuality. 
Our knowledge of the peculiar status of princesses is based mainly on 
sources from the late nineteenth and the twentieth centuries. Al of those 
sources are at best ambiguous and at worst shrilly judgmental about 
women born to the royal line. Some heap scorn on the princesses' "sexual 
freedom," even though Fon culture was relatively permissive. Reactions 
to a commoner wife's adultery, for example, ranged from pretending not 
to notice to execution of the woman, depending upon the social rank of 
both the husband and the wife. Nevertheless, the more common attitude 
was, "If your \.V:ife is unfaithful, is that any reason to wish her dead? We 
prefer to make accommodations." Other sources condemn princesses for 
having liaisons with half-brothers, though the morals of their partners, 
the princes and kings who took their sisters as \.V:ives, are not questioned. 
The popular contempt reflected in these accounts was confirmed to 
me again and again in the field. Men took it as a given that princesses 
were faithless wives: "Royalty is capable of anything. They can never be 
trusted. If, for example, you are married to a princess, and your enemies 
put you in prison, she will go out and sleep with your enemies. She'll 
sleep with your brother in your own house. A princess will always betray 
you. Royalty has no morals, no ethics. They lie and cheat. All things 
are permitted to them." '1 Contemporary princesses themselves reflected 
popular stereotypes, complaining that they had difficulties in finding 
men wining to marry them, yet boasting of their reputations as trouble-
• 
some co-wives. 
How are we to interpret this, and where if anywhere is there evidence 
for something changing in the nineteenth century? There are three tell­
ing characteristics of nineteenth-century narratives about princesses that

--- Page 263 ---
246 
The Decline of Dahomey 
point to change: the accounts are preoccupied with control over female 
sexuality; they are concerned with princesses only as wives; and they are 
consistently contradictory. 
We have evidence that attempts were made in the nineteenth century 
to control princesses' sexuality, and control over sexuality generally cor­
relates with attempts to contra) other aspects of women's lives. Bulton 
says that "formerly, the royal ladies had only temporary husbands, visit­
ing all men who pleased them. M this caused great scandals, the King has 
forbidden polyandry." Two sons of Glele offer corroborating testimony, 
saying that their oldest sister. the na daho, was responsible for enforcing 
proper behavior: "If her younger sisters did not respect their husbands, 
she would judge them. If they began to act like whores, she would correct 
them. She would judge disputes between her younger sisters and their 
husbands." Le Herisse, too, confirms that princesses were no longer 
allowed to control their sexuality when he describes punishments for 
princesses' adultery, commenting that for a princess it was a minor in­
fraction; at worst, the guilty woman spent some months confined at the 
home of the meu.32 
Europeans in this period were also told that virginity was expected 
of princesses. Burton several times mentions the case of the twin first­
born daughters of Glele and the yovoganon who lost their virginity to a 
nephew of the king. Le Herisse similarly claims that princesses, like com­
moner girls, had to be virgins. Otherwise, an enraged king, their father, 
would supposedly take back the very numerous wedding gifts that he 
had provided.33 Nevertheless, the twin daughters of Glele did marry the 
migan and the meu. and evidence from before and after this period, from 
the eighteenth and twentieth centuries, indicates very little concern on 
the part ofFon culture with virginity as a principle for anyone. 
Second. the behavior and comportment of princesses was constantly 
discussed in their role as wives, as subordinates to husbands. rather than 
as sisters of the kings, as persons with a high degree of autonomy. The 
anthropologist Karen Sacks has argued that women as sisters in kin­
corporate forms of social organization enjoyed relatively greater ability 
to influence events than they did in the subordinate position of wife, a 
finding that is consistent with Dahomean patterns. Discussing princesses

--- Page 264 ---
The Decline of Dahomey 
247 
only in the role of wife, then, is a subtle but telling distinction and com­
mentary about their relative status. In early Dahomey, princesses had 
been married politically, and their marriages cemented alliances between 
Dahomey and neighboring kingdoms. In the mid-nineteenth century, 
princesses continued to marry in political alliances, though virtually al 
of the recorded examples are of princesses being married internally, 
to high-ranking officials of the kingdom. For example, the two oldest 
daughters of the king were always married to the migan and meu, the 
migan wedding the elder. Thus the na daho, the senior daughter ofGlele 
who had authority over younger siblings, was also known as na migansi 
(literally, princess-wife of the migan). Lesser officials were given other 
women of the royal line in marriage. 
Not only were princesses being seen more and more as wives of offi­
cials rather than independent members of the royal lineage, they were as 
such also more and more despised and distrusted. Le Herisse notes that 
marriage to a princess could be problematic, because "flattered in his 
pride and desirous of taking full advantage of the benefits of the alliance, 
the husband of a princess would show himself to be ful of attention for 
her; he would consult her in many circumstances, dress her beautifully, 
and finally give her precedence over his other wives . . . .  But if, later, he 
had reason to complain about his wife, could he in good conscience go 
disparage her before the king? Could he denigrate before the giver the 
gift that had been given him?" Forbes raised the problem of mariage to 
a princess far more directly and bluntly, saying "no office under govern­
ment is paid, and the offices . . .  are subject to much espionage. In the 
house of each minister lives a king's daughter and two officers: these 
superintend the minister's trade, on which he pays tribute according to 
their report . . . .  The whole system is one of espionage, cunning, and 
intrigue.".J4 Forbes's description of a princess-wife as a spy in the house­
hold reflects images of royal female treachery that apparently became 
common in the nineteenth century. It evokes the memory of the legend 
of Na Cere, the daughter of Agaja who married the king of Whydah. By 
spying on her husband and his household, Na Geze was able to pave the 
way for the Dahomean victory over the kingdom of the Hwecla. A myth 
that did not exist shortly after the 1727 conquest, the myth of Na Geze

--- Page 265 ---
248 
The Decline of Dahomey 
may well have been invented in the late nineteenth century, because it 
demonstrates vividly the dangers that popular thought of that period 
projected onto marital liaisons with princesses. 
Visitors' accounts, when read closely, further raise questions about 
images of women and the way influences in gender attitudes were mov· 
ing back and forth between Europe and Africa. Forbes, who spent a 
good deal of time visiting and being visited by ministers and prominent 
princes, clearly understood that those private visits of cordiality provided 
intelligence to him about the politics of the kingdom and gave members 
of the monarchy insights into European thinking. However, when the na 
daho, like her brothers, sent Forbes yams and fruit with an invitation to 
cal, he interpreted her overture as sexually motivated and rebuffed it.}5 
Was he right? Was she in fact seeking a sexual liaison, as befitted the 
reputation of princesses, or was she behaving as a member of the mon­
archy' a high-ranking princess who, like her brothers, needed to cultivate 
a foreigner for reasons of state? And how did the Dahomeans interpret 
the fact that Forbes refused to see her? How did such incidents, confirm­
ing the lack of access for women to European envoys, affect princesses' 
ability to participate at the center of power? 
Princesses by the mid-nineteenth century were also becoming ahosi, 
members of the palace organization. Gezo had begun to appoint his 
brothers to high offices, a practice that Glele continued and expanded, 
and Behanzin assembled a monarchy that was nearly exclusively royal. 
We have evidence that by the time of Glele, princesses were being named 
to the ministerial posts paralleling the gbonugan daho. Yet such offices 
had to be held by women within the palace organization, by ahosi, per­
sons who were by definition dependents or wives of the king. Children 
of Glele and Behanzin spoke to me with some embarrassment of the fact 
that many of Behanzin's most prominent wives were also his sisters.36 
Certainly, women in high-ranking positions within the palace exercised 
power, yet by exercising their power as wives rather than sisters, prin­
cesses lost the autonomy that had earlier characterized their political lives 
as royal equals to their brothers. 
Finally, there is a great deal of ambiguity and contradiction about 
princesses that hints that attitudes toward them were in flux; by exten-

--- Page 266 ---
The Decflne of Dahomey 
249 
sion, that suggests their status was changing. Perhaps most striking is the 
account of the usually balanced Le Herisse, whose own marriage to a 
daughter of Behanzin early in the colonial period must have compro­
mised his official position from time to time. On the one hand, Le 
Herisse argues that marriage to a princess was a great honor and mark of 
favor by the king; on the other, he claims that a man chosen to be king 
had to be born of a woman of commoner background, since princesses' 
morals were such that a king could never be sure of the paternity of his 
sons by women of royal blood. Princesses "go around spreading gossip, 
stirring up intrigues and . . .  selling love." 37 
Princesses became the unwelcome gift-wives of high officials in the 
nineteenth century. but commoner men who were members of the 
gbonugan daho and commoner caboceers, the holders of other chiefly 
offices, were subject to other unwanted changes that signaled a consoli­
dation of power within the hands of the royal lineage. They and their 
lineages must have watched with some consternation as Glele and later 
his son Behanzin systematically named their own brothers to offices for­
merly reserved for anyone but a member of the royal family. Along with 
women of the palace organization, they would have also shared concern 
at seeing Glele take another prince as his dosest adviser and most inti­
mate friend. 
In the eighteenth century. the royal wives had been described both as 
close advisers to the king and as persons who were trustees of the king's 
wishes, particularly his wishes in the naming of an heir. By the reign of 
Glele. in addition to the several bokonon (diviners) who were central in 
advising the king, there was a male member of the royal family who was 
recognized as the king's confidant and best friend. That person was the 
Prince Adande;an. a son of Gnirnavo, who was a son of King Agonglo. 
He was described by Burton as "a favourite at court," someone said to 
have been made very wealthy by his friend Glele, even though he was 
only a "lieutenant" of the migan. Nevertheless, Adande;an was acknowl­
edged as the king's dearest friend and a dose adviser. Adandejan. for 
example, was one of only three male courtiers present when Glele with 
"half-a-dozen 'ladies'" received Burton in private audience.µ8 Some years 
later. Adandejan's son received his father's name and estate, and in turn

--- Page 267 ---
250 
The Decline of Dahomey 
made himself a friend of Behanzin. When the defeated Dahomeans were 
forced to sue for terms with the French invading forces in 1892 and 1893, 
it was Adandejan, usually in the company of one other trusted adviser of 
the king, who most often would be listed as envoy from Behanzin. In 
1894, he would become the only adult male of the royal family to accom­
pany the deposed king into exile.)9 
Religion and Royal Control ..-. 
The changing pattern of relations between the royal family and com­
moners in Dahomey was mirrored in the religious life of the kingdom. 
Kutome, the spirit world, was conceived as an exact image of Gbetome, 
the world of the living. In that sense. Fon culture inscribed its intellectual 
history on the realm of the spirits as the monarchy reordered and re­
created the invisible world to suit an idealized conception of order and 
power as it existed, or should exist, in the visible world. We can read the 
record of the changing hierarchies of the gods and the altered patterns of 
officials responsible for their control to see the degree to which com­
moner families in the late nineteenth century had been distanced from 
access to power. Religious practices also hi.nt of new conceptions of the 
center of power, of an image of an idealized monarch who would cen­
tralize and monopolize power in his own person as representative of all 
the kings who had gone before. Two major changes in religious organi­
zation underscore these new conceptions of power and who might legiti­
mately wield it. The first was the development of worship that honored 
deified members of the royal family: the Nesuhwe. princes and prin­
cesses, and their more powerful and dangerous siblings, the tohosu. The 
second was the practice of Fa divination. which had begun to take center 
stage in the spiritual and decision-making life of the king and kingdom. 
The word Nesuhwe (occasionally lensouhwe) does not appear in the 
literature until the nineteenth century, when people such as the Roman 
Catholic missionary Borghero remarked the "mysterious" divinity Nesu, 
who was worshipped in "obscure and hidden temples" around the city 
of Abomey. Nesuhwe celebrated the lives of the sons and daughters of the 
kings, though it did not memorialize all the children of all the kings. 
Clustered into congregations, each of which incorporated the children of

--- Page 268 ---
The Decline of Dahomey 
251 
a given king, Nesuhwe appears to have included onJy the most important 
direct children-for example, lineage officeholders such as the na daho 
(oldest daughter), the vigan (literally, chief of the children, the efective 
lineage head of that branch of the royal family), numerous zinkponon 
(tit1ed holders of estates), and others said to have been of central impor­
tance during and after their father's reign. The numbers of royalty re­
membered and honored through Nesuhwe were 20 to 30 in each of the 
individual branches of the royal family, divided fairly evenly between 
men and women, though literally dozens of children were fathered by 
individual monarchs. For example, a census of the children of Glele and 
Behanzin taken after the fall of the kingdom found that 129 children of 
Glele and 77 of Behanzin's children had survived to maturity.40 Venerated 
as vodun, these humans-turned-god were honored by adepts initiated 
into their worship, who would be possessed by their princely ancestors 
during ceremonies. Followers of Nesuhwe were theoretically all royalty, 
descendants within the various branches of the royal family of the vodun 
being honored. In fact, Nesuhwe and the related congregations dedicated 
to the tohosu were the only vodun to which members of the royal family 
might pledge themselves as vodunsi. 
As spirits, the tohosu appear to have predated the Nesuhwe, though 
they were effectively subsumed under the category of "children of the 
king" (see chapter 3). Tohosu are said to have made themselves known 
to Fon culture initially at mid-eighteenth century, during the reign of 
Tegbesu. Originally born only in the royal family, tohosu were creatures 
with anomalous characteristics, whose arrival demanded ritual attention. 
"When a Tohosu comes to earth, it is in the body of an abnormal or 
monstrous infant. For a Tohosu, to be born is a sign of discontent, a cal 
to order. "4l Tohosu might be declared at the appearance of any abnor­
mality in a newborn, with signs that ranged from hair and teeth at birth 
to extreme physical deformities that were typically attributed to the most 
powerful of the royal tohosu. Even a spontaneous abortion or stillbirth 
might be considered a tohosu. If recognized, tohosu were said to be re­
turned to the fluid world from which they had come; their name means, 
literally, king of the water, in the sense of a marsh or swamp. Eldest 
among the tohosu was Akaba's fearsome offspring Zumadunu, a creature

--- Page 269 ---
252 
The Decline of Dahomey 
born with six eyes and a growth on his buttocks so enormous that it 
dragged after him when he walked. Within a day he had transformed 
himself into a ball. and then a bird, which remained his central visual 
symbol. Significantly, the tohosu combined elements that were linked 
conceptually to both the deified members of the royal family and to the 
popular vodun. Children of kings, on the one hand, they were beings 
who belonged submerged within the blackness of swamps, areas that sug­
gested the awesome supernatural. yet associated-with-nature powers of 
popular vodun. Tohosu were beings born of the royal lineage, yet origi­
nally their priests went north to Mahi country to learn how to worship 
them, just as priests had done for many other popular vodun that entered 
Dahomey. Perhaps this was the characteristic of the tohosu-that they 
were popular vodun imported yet transformed to descendants in the 
royal line-that prompted the monarchy to impose them as paramount 
over al the other gods. Whatever the reason, by the time of Glele, it was 
Zumadunu who reigned as first divinity in the kingdom of Dahomey. 
During the eighteenth century, Zumadunu's priest and the titular head 
of all the tohosu was Mivede, who reported to Hwanjile, the kpojito of 
Tegbesu. Hwanjile, of course, had during that period assumed control 
over the regulation of all the vodun, reworking the hierarchy of the gods 
under the creator-deities, Mawu and Lisa, for whom she was a priest and 
benefactor. As heads of the realm of Kutome, Mawu and Lisa in turn 
suggested an eighteenth-century conception of power that balanced male 
and female, royal and commoner. We last saw Hwanjile in 1797. when she 
was implicated in the murder of Agonglo and was a member of the de­
feated side in the succession struggle that led to the reign of Adandozan. 
Whether it was because of that incident or because of a broader ideo­
logical change in definitions of leadership, by mid-nineteenth century 
Hwanjile and her protege-vodun no longer controlled religious life, 
though she still remained titular high priest for Mawu and Lisa. Three 
other names are variously mentioned as key figures in the religious life of 
the late nineteenth century: the ajaho, the minister of religion appointed 
by the king; Mivede, the priest of Zumadunu; and the agasunon, the 
priest of Agasu. leopard-totem of the royal family. The ajaho's responsi­
bilities exactly duplicated those formerly entrusted to Hwan;ile: to be a

--- Page 270 ---
The Decline of Dahomey 
253 
liaison between the monarchy and the priests of the popular vodun. to 
regulate the appointment and investiture of priests, to authorize the in­
stallation of new shrines to vodun, to oversee the timing of ceremonies, 
and to be initial judge of offenses committed by followers of the vodun. 
Mivede and the agasunon were central to the long succession of rituals 
that honored the ancestors of the royal family. which by mid-nineteenth 
century were by law the primary ceremonies of the religious life of the 
kingdom. 
The religious year in nineteenth-century Dahomey began with the 
honoring of the ancestors of the kings. These were the most important 
ceremonies of Customs. They involved a cycle of ceremonies in which 
the king, the agasunon, and the assembled court visited the spirits of each 
departed king and kpojito in order, offering prayers and sacrifices that 
reordered and reconfirmed the balance between Kutome and Gbetome. 
Immediately following the cycle of palace ceremonies in honor of kings 
and kpojito came the turn of the tohosu. Their rites were followed by the 
celebration of the Nesuhwe. It was weeks or months later. after the end 
of all the royal ceremonies, that commoner families were permitted to 
honer their ancestors and the priests of the popular vodun were allowed 
to perform their ceremonies. Even funeral ceremonies could not take 
place until the process ofhonoring the royal ancestors-kings and kpo­
jito, tohosu and Nesuhwe-was complete. By delaying the honoring of 
the spiritual forces associated with commoner ancestors and the popular 
vodun, the monarchy kept the followers of those spirits under a severe 
constraint, because they risked suffering the displeasure of their own 
vodun while they waited for the royal ceremonies to be completed. In 
fact, what began to happen in the late nineteenth century was a social 
reordering that worked simultaneously to minimize the dangers of the 
religious system for the lower-ranking spiritual entities while it rein­
forced and reaffirmed the centrality of the royal lineage. The network that 
provided the framework for this reordering was the system of tohosu. 
Each new reign in Dahomey produced a new branch of the royal lin­
eage that included the descendants of all the sons and daughters of the 
king, plus literally hundreds of followers, wives, slaves. and other depen­
dents. The members of each of these new sublineages established what

--- Page 271 ---
254 
The Decline of Dahomey 
was effectively a new quarter of Abomey. Their numbers incorporated 
the households of numerous high· ranking persons of commoner and 
slave origin who were part of or were attached to that king's monarchy to 
perform functions of some kind: they induded. for example, ministers 
and officials, artisans established as ahosi, and priests of vodun imported 
during that reign. In these quarters of the capital city, the descendants of 
the monarchies of past reigns continued to reside in close proximity to 
each other. Sometimes individuals adopted the names of the princely line 
as their own; others maintained their lineage names but remained under 
the jural authority of the vigan. the head of their particular branch of the 
royal family. As the strict hierarchy for the honoring of the vodun was 
solidified in the time of Glele, commoner lines attached to particular 
branches of the royal family began to be permitted to recognize tohosu 
in their own families. These commoner tohosu could be honored at the 
same time as their royal. patron tohosu. Thus families attached to par· 
ticular kings but not originally of royal birth could move up in the hier· 
army of the vodun, effectively honoring their own tohosu·ancestor along 
with the tohosu of their particular branch of the Alladahonu line. They 
would simultaneously move up socially in the hierarchy of rank and 
privilege in a world where royal blood was increasingly the most signifi· 
cant marker. At the same time. major figures from a given reign such as 
the migan and the meu would become deified as vodun of the Nesuhwe 
of their branch of the royal family. In effect, tohosu and Nesuhwe began 
to draw virtually everyone in Abomey and-through the extended net­
works of kinship and service-everyone on the plateau and ultimately 
in the kingdom into relationships of subordination to one or another 
branch of the royal lineage. 42 
What was effectively happening in the late nineteenth century was a 
social and religious rearrangement that was based on a hierarchical vision 
of social structure. Members of the current ruling branch of the royal 
family were at the top of that hierarchy, followed in order by the previous 
branches of the royal line. Commoners, rather than standing as necessary 
partners with the AUadahonu, were relegated to a low social status, which 
they modified using the ameliorating vehicle of the tohosu to effect reli­
gious alliances with royalty. That same hierarchical vision of the primacy

--- Page 272 ---
The Decline of Dahomey 
255 
of the royal line was reified in the pattern of appointments to various 
high offices of the land, as son.s and daughters of kings replaced com­
moners. Yet the sweep of royalty into control and the exclusion of 
commoners from power was never complete. Rather, there was a good 
deal of ideological tension and confusion, and there were curious in­
consistencies in the patterns by which the late-nineteenth-century kings 
squeezed men and women of common birth out of high offices and re­
placed them with their close relatives. For example, both Glele and 8e­
hanzin named brothers and other princes to the ranks of the gbonugan 
daho and appointed ahosi-princesses as officials within the palace; yet in 
their exercise of power and their decision making, GleJe and Behanzin 
did not depend fully on their own royal appointees, and sometimes do 
not even appear to have trusted them. The last kings of independent Da­
homey as often as not worked with a tiny handful of male advisers. in­
cluding a small number ofbokonon or diviners of Fa. It is very likely that 
all of these individuals represented and reified the idea that power could 
and should be monopolized by a male absolute monarch. 
During the reign of Tegbesu, the Fa (Ifa) system of divination was 
one of several competing systems for making decisions and foretelling 
the future. By the nineteenth century, it had become the predominant 
system. Freeman in the 1840S declared that Fa (Affar) was the most 
important "fetish" of the nation.43 Fa flourished and was strengthened 
through the cultural links with Yorubaland that were the by-product 
of nineteenth-century warfare and the disintegration of Oyo. Yoruba­
speaking diviners settled in Dahomey, and Dahomeans, including some 
sons of Gew and Gle1e, went to Yorubaland to study lfa in the families 
of their Yoruba-speaking mothers. 
The first European to call attention to the central position of diviners 
of Fa at court was Burton. who was lodged in Abomey at the home of 
Glele's leading bokonon, rather than in the quarters of the meu, where 
visitors to Gezo's court had normally been housed. Burton describes the 
bokonon as the elderly son of Gezo's favorite diviner, a man who had 
predicted that Glele would be named king long before his appointment 
as vidaho. Gle1e thereafter trusted his word and was guided "in all his 
movements by his Buko-no."'" The man was well-to-do, having received

--- Page 273 ---
256 
The Decline of Dahomey 
slaves and land from his patron, and he had some eighty wives, including 
a princess. At least two other bokonon, and possibly several more, were 
prominent advisors to Glele. Nugbodohwe, to whom Glele gave the re­
vealing name "The house where truth is told," is generally cited as that 
king's principal diviner. Nugbodohwe, a central political figure, would 
take a stand against Glele's successor at the time of the king's death. n 
The other well-known diviner of Glele's era was Gedegbe, whose biog­
raphy and personal philosophy anchor Maupoil's monumental study of 
divination. 
The various bokonon of the king consulted Fa daily for virtually 
every decision to be taken; nothing was done without bokonon's advice. 
Knowledgeable as herbalists, the king's diviners also prescribed medicines 
to the palace inhabitants and on occasion to visiting Europeans who fell 
il. Maurice GIeIe argues that the bokonon in a sense shared power with 
the king-a perspective also shared by Maupoil.46 The bokonon's very 
presence in the interior of the palace, and the nature of the belief system 
that they represented and manipulated, are telling signs of the changing 
ideological vision of the kingship and monarchy. 
There were two characteristics of the Fa system of divination that dis­
tinguished it from other spiritual and ritual practices among the Fan: 
first, Fa focused on the male; and second, it was concerned wholly with 
the individual. fu such, Fa contrasted starkly with Fan popular and royal 
deities. Women were typically the principal followers of vodun and held 
leadership positions in the chapter houses organized to worship them. 
Initiated into the sacred knowledge of the god, both female and male 
adepts communed directly with the spirits through the vehicle of posses­
sion, when the vodun would mount on their heads. The approach to the 
vodun was public and communal, set in open spaces of towns and villages 
and accompanied by music and dance that called all to witness. In con­
trast, Fa was private and hidden. Consultations were held within the 
closed interior spaces of compounds or in the secrecy of sacred forests. 
Unlike other vodun, Fa distanced the believer from the deity, requiring 
the intercession of a highly trained male specialist, the bokonon, for ful 
consultation with the spirit world.7 Anyone, male or female, could go to 
a diviner to seek knowledge of the unknown. However, following the

--- Page 274 ---
The Decline of Dahomey 
257 
patriarchal imperatives of Yoruba culture, Fa was centrally concerned 
with men's obligation to learn their destiny. At its deepest levels, Fa divi­
nation encouraged men to live their lives so as to build on the hidden 
knowledge of their fate, identifying and neutralizing dangers that other­
wise were concealed from them, recognizing and taking advantage of 
opportunities, and generally promoting the fortunes of their patrilineage. 
Ideally, men at a relatively young age learned their kpoli, their sacred 
personal sign, through a retreat and ritual directed by a bokonon. There­
after, they were expected to continue a lifelong quest for personal direc­
tion and certainty, their path guided by one or more bokonon. The 
system effectively demanded the building of an intimate intellectual 
and emotional relationship between a male client and his male adviser­
diviner. 
Not everyone was meant to pursue knowledge of personal destiny. A 
man's subordinates and followers, for example, might not need to know 
their kpoli-because they could be seen as sharing their leader's fate. 
More significantly, women's destinies were tied to and subsumed under 
those of their fathers and husbands. With the exception of some prin­
cesses and other relatively autonomous persons, women rarely learned 
their sacred signs, and even then were limited to the early stages of the 
lifelong process of discovery of personal destiny. The system of Fa divi­
nation thus assumed the subordination of women and reinforced it 
through its exclusively male priesthood and its view that only men as 
autonomous beings were worthy of personal destinies. 
Like the Egungun and Oro societies. also imported from Yorubaland 
in the nineteenth century, the belief system of Fa was deeply concerned 
with issues of control over women. Perhaps most indicative of woman's 
lowly place in the gaze of Fa was the existence of the related vodun, 
Gbaadu, imported from Yorubaland by a bokonon of Glele. Known as 
Odu to Yoruba-speakers, Gbaadu represented the totality of knowledge 
of Fa, and was considered to be extremely powerful and dangerous, more 
dangerous and difficult to control than Fa himself. Indeed. Gbaadu's few 
male priests never met publicly. so dangerous were the approaches to 
their divinity. The vodun's danger was acute for wives of the heads of 
households who had installed Gbaadu in their homes, because the vodun

--- Page 275 ---
258 
The Decline of Dahomey 
instantly killed any woman who even thought about committing adul­
tery. Women were absolutely forbidden to become adepts of Gbaadu. 
The hostility of the vodun to the female was emphasized by the list of 
ingredients needed to install Gbaadu in a new shrine: it included pre­
served female genitals, cut from a woman who died during pregnancy. 
What was the impact of all this on conceptions of power at the center 
of Dahomey? The practice of Fa has to have focused the attention of the 
men who were king on themselves and their personal destinies. The king 
was aho, the avatar of al his ancestors, the sum total of all those who had 
gone before. Conceptually, the practice of Fa must have contributed to a 
blurring of distinctions between individual and dynastic destinies, be­
tween king and kingdom. In private sessions with the bokonon of Fa, all 
that was important was the destiny of a single man. Gone were concerns 
for a kingdom made up of complementary parts, of alliances between an 
intrusive lineage and the owners of the land. Gone was a need to balance 
the interests of the royal lineage with the interests of commoners, of a 
necessity to integrate foreigners into a social order, of an obligation to 
balance male and female, of a need to ease tensions between inside and 
outside. Al that mattered was the advice offered by Fa, as determined by 
the bokonon. [ronically, then, the late nineteenth-century kings pushed 
commoners out of high office to make room for their own siblings, but 
then turned for their most trusted counsel to men who had come from 
a foreign culture and enemy territory, priests who controlled a spiritual 
system that denied and negated many of the principles stiU proclaimed 
as the binding ideological cement of the nation. 
Fa, the tohosu, and Nesuhwe had moved to a central position among 
the spiritual entities believed to participate in the vagaries of human 
existence. And what of the previous paramount spirits of the Daho­
mean hierarchy of the gods, Mawu and Lisa? Humans who set up new 
gods as central obviously risked the wrath of the older, displaced deities. 
Maupoil, reflecting the vision of the diviner Gedegbe, explains the trans­
formation by noting that Mawu and Lisa together as creator deities con­
tinued to set the destinies of al human beings. Though they had divided 
the world of the gods among the various vodun, Mawu and Lisa reserved 
this ultimate creative act to themselves. Thus Fa, who revealed portions

--- Page 276 ---
The Decline of Dahomey 
259 
of their destiny to humans, was simply the voice of Mawu and Lisa. Yet 
in this role and in Maupoil's conception-and presumably in the con­
ception of royal bokonon of the nineteenth century-Fa was superior to 
Mawu and Lisa, for without Fa, all other vodun were condemned to be 
silent, unable to be heard by humanity. Because Fa had to be consulted 
at virtually al decision-making moments, Fa was effectively supreme, be­
cause "whether it's a matter of a ceremony, of a sacrifice, of some problem 
identified in the practice of a cult, Fa is always consulted on the nature, 
time, place and length of measures to be taken. Al the vodun are in this 
sense under his control. One can see the political importance invested in 
such a power; in any case, only the grand priests of Fa had continual 
access to the king of Abomey, who even gave them a site for consulting 
in the interior of his palace." 49 The royal conceptions of power relations 
were inscribed in the hierarchy of the vodun. There ruled the titular head 
of all, Zumadunu, a member of the royal dynasty, a being whose non­
humanoid form made him a worthy and appropriate king, both over 
other deified humans and the popular vodun who had never existed in 
human fonn. But even Zumadunu did oot rule alone. Fa challenged and 
effectively superseded Zumadunu's power and the power of all the other 
voduo through his control over communications between the seen and 
the unseen. 
Succession in the Time of Clele and 8ehanzin r<::.' 
The death of Gezo is described in detail and at relatively great length by 
Dunglas. Gezo was with his army returning from war waged in Egba 
territory near Meko in late 1858. In the vicinity ofEkpo, a village consid­
ered part of the kingdom of Ketu, King Gezo stepped down from his 
hammock and was shot and wounded by a young man who then man­
aged to escape. Assuming that the gunman was from Ekpo, which the 
Dahomeans had attacked the previous February, the army turned and 
devastated the village. Meanwhile, the king was rushed back to Abomey. 
Gezo lingered for ten to fifteen days and then died of infection from the 
wound. Freeman was told what was essentially a confirming tradition­
that Gew had "caught a fever" on a war expedition to Po (Ekpo) and 
died. Later visitors heard the euphemism that smallpox had caused

--- Page 277 ---
260 
The Decline of Dahomey 
Gezo's death, though a slow-moving report correctly noting the real cause 
reached the British Foreign Office in time to be misunderstood as infor­
mation about Glele and forwarded to Burton in 1863.50 
The accessions of Glele in 1858 and of his son Behanzin in 1889 were 
similar in many respects. Both men were recognized as heir long in ad­
vance of their fathers' deaths. As vidaho, each was permitted to develop 
the power base necessary to take and keep control. Both were visible and 
active at the courts of their fathers, and were wel known to European 
visitors to Abomey. At the death of his predecessor, each vidaho was op­
posed by another prince. The rivals to Glele and Behanzin were allied 
with and promoted by powerful women of the palace organization. Each 
of the women champions of the would-be kings held the same office, that 
of the tononu, head of the household of the king. Although persons in 
the office of tononu were expected to die with the king, both women were 
exempted from the death requirement. The similarities of the accessions 
of Glele and Behanzin contrast with earlier succession struggles. Taken 
together, they suggest that the succession process had changed in signifi­
cant ways, and they highlight the increasing efforts of the royal family to 
monopolize power in the kingdom. 
There were at least three men named vidaho during the reigns of 
Gezo and Glele. Gezo selected Badahun, who took the name GJele on 
his enstoolment. Shortly after Glele consolidated his power as king, his 
son Ahanhanzo was named vidaho. When Ahanhanzo died in 1876, an­
other son of GJele, Kondo. became the official heir, and it was Kondo 
who succeeded Glele under the name Behanzin. All three nineteenth­
century vidaho enjoyed opportunities and privileges not known to their 
eighteenth-century predecessors. 
Gezo had named Prince Badahun his vidaho at the latest by the 1840S. 
Badahun was introduced to Forbes in 1849 and was mentioned regularly 
by traveJers in the 1850s. Some traditions claim that a son of Adandozan 
had been Gezo's vidaho for some twenty years after the coup of circa 1818, 
which suggests that Gezo may have waited to name his own vidaho until 
he had an adult son born to him after he had taken power. Whatever the 
case, Gezo appears to have decided to make sure that his vidaho would 
enjoy a strong enough power base to win the kingship without opposi­
tion. He set about instituting changes in the process by which a prince

--- Page 278 ---
The Decline of Dahomey 
26 1 
8. A nineteenth-century king, probably Gew, with attendants. Note the similarities with 
the dress of the women soldiers in the Paris photo (fig. 9). (Collection Muse de I'Homme, 
Paris) 
became king in Dahomey. Those changes included strengthening the po­
sition of the vidaho and attempting to preempt a physical struggle within 
the palace. 
Accounts based on nineteenth-century sources describe an education 
for heirs to the stool of Dahomey that put them at the center of the mon-

--- Page 279 ---
262 
The Decline of Dahomey 
archy well before their father's death. As in the eighteenth century, poten­
tial heirs were reared in the households of ministers and other prominent 
persons, being given land, wives, and slaves as they came of age. The 
nineteenth-century mentors, however, tended to be the closest and dear­
est associates of the king. 8adahun, the future Glele, grew up in the 
household of Tome tin, the royal meu and uterine brother of the king. He 
remained Tometin's protege throughout the lifetime of Gezo. In turn, 
Glele's first vidaho, Ahanhanzo, was reared in the home of the king's 
closest ally and friend, the prince Adandejan. Kondo. in contrast, was 
an adult by the time he was named vidaho. Oral traditions are divided 
about his upbringing and character. One source says that he was reared 
by Hehegunon, a son of Gezo who became ajaho (minister of religion) 
under Glele. Another claims that he was tutored by the deposed king 
Adandozan, a tradition that is clearly meant to discredit him. Evidence 
does suggest. nevertheless. that unlike Ahanhanzo. Kondo did not enjoy 
a close personal relationship with his father.SI 
Each prince named to the position of vidaho would develop an estate 
and build a palace on the outskirts of Abomey on land granted him by 
his father. Jegbe. now a quarter of Abomey peopled by descendentss of 
Glele, grew up around the palace established by Badahun. His palace 
became a center where he received prominent visitors, including Euro­
peans, and where he enjoyed rights that included the ability to pardon 
fugitives from justice whom he chose to protect. Similarly, Ahanhanzo 
had a residence near that of his mentor, Adandejan, where he received 
and charmed visitors such as SkertcWy. Kondo built Time, which remains 
the ancestral home of the descendants of Behanzin. 
Unlike their predecessors. the vidaho of Gezo and Glele were not kept 
away from politics, but took part in councils of state and were often pres­
ent at private audiences of the king. Freeman, for example. spoke of night 
meetings with Gezo that were attended by "two or three favorite wives." 
by the meu. and by the future Glele. Ahanhanzo and Kondo similarly 
were present at court and active in public deliberations. Other sources 
stress the role of the king in preparing the crown prince for power. Le 
Herisse claims that the king shared royal secrets with the heir, including

--- Page 280 ---
The Decline of Dahomey 
263 
the secret history of the origins of the royal family, a history that was not 
revealed to outsiders until the twentieth century. Maurice Glele similarly 
argues that the king instructed the vidaho privately in the history of the 
kingdom and how to govern it, having conversations with him each year 
at the dosing of the ceremonies in honor of the royal ancestors. 52 
Despite the evidence that Gezo actively promoted Badahun and 
strengthened his position as vidaho, some twentieth-century historians 
have interpreted the succession from Gezo to Glele as a struggle between 
two factions, or parties, grouped respectively around one or the other. 
The faction allied with the king was said to have been progressive, mod­
ernizing, pro-European and committed to the ending of the slave trade 
and human sacrifice. The other faction. linked to Badahun, was conser­
vative, militaristic, anti-European. and deeply committed to the con­
tinuation of human sacrifice. The enstoolment of Glele thus represented 
the triumph of reactionary forces and the negation of al the reforms that 
Gezo had instituted. In fact, as we have seen in the case of the king-as­
prince and the enlargement of the ceremonial cycle, Gezo's monarchy 
had not really departed from the fundamental principles upon which the 
kingdom had been created. The monarchy had made a decision in early 
1852 to sign a treaty with Britain promising to abolish the slave trade out 
of Whydah. Simultaneously, they moved to promote, aggressively, the 
production of palm oil and kernels. John Reid has shown that, when 
the economy continued to stumble by 1855-56, when a settlement with 
Abeokuta remained elusive, when a potential slave revolt was uncovered 
in 1855, and when cowry inflation threatened chaos. discussions began at 
court about the viability of the new policy. When the demand for slaves 
arose anew in 1857. the monarchy rapidly retreated from its apparent 
acquiescence to British demandsY In short. the issue of two opposing 
policy directions appears to have been settled more than a year before 
the death of Gezo. 
Evidence also suggests that the so-called parties of the 1855-56 period 
were much less hard and firm than later interpretations have suggested. 
French observers in particular spoke of a party of resistance, a "national" 
party that had grown up around the crown prince in opposition to the

--- Page 281 ---
264 
The Decline of Dahomey 
king. Supposedly allied with Badahun in this party was the meu. A closer 
look at the European accounts, however, indicates a more complex situ­
ation. The meu in 1856, described as being about eighty years old, was 
Voglosu, a commoner who had served King Adandozan and had been 
part of the cabal that plotted the coup d'etat against him with Gezo. En­
glish and French sources make clear that it was the meu, as opposed to 
the migan, who was particularly influential at court. Freeman declared 
that "he seemed to be, as it were, the King's second self." French visitors 
concurred, grumbling that the meu was virtually always present in audi­
ences and that no business could be transacted without him. In contrast, 
the migan, supposedly the prime minister, rarely appeared in European 
accounts. Forbes met him in 1850 and described him as a man in his 
forties. This suggests that Atindebaku. the commoner migan first named 
by Gezo, had died and been replaced (Ganse, the original migan of royal 
blood, was stil alive in 1849). It also suggests that the original members 
of the monarchy of Gezo played a preponderant role in political discus­
sions right up to the death of the king.54 
Or. Repin, a French visitor of 1856, believed that the meu was more 
favorable to both the British and the Portuguese than to the French. 
Anxious to get the king's agreement to a French request to establish a 
trading settlement in Abomey, and believing that the meu was respon­
sible for constraints on trading in Whydah, Repin struggled to see the 
king outside the presence of his seemingly hostile meu. On the other 
hand, Freeman believed that the meu was not favorable to the British 
and complained that he was antimissionary and pro-slave trade. In fact, 
one of the things that Meu Voglosu and Badahun appear to have had in 
common was a less cordial manner with Europeans than that of Gezo. 
But that does not necessarily mean that together they represented a dis­
tinct party or that they promoted a specific ideological position or policy 
over any extended period of time. Indeed, Freeman enlisted the aid of 
Badahun to bypass the meu. He appealed successfully to the male to­
nonu. "by whose assistance we are enabled to counteract the old mewu's 
intrigues." Freeman later worked out a scheme by which he received, 
through the good offices of Badahun and the tononu, private access to 
Gezo outside the presence of the meu. ĸs

--- Page 282 ---
The Decline of Dahomey 
265 
Obviously. given this evidence of the fluidity of individual relation· 
ships in court at a moment of changing policy. it seems mistaken to 
view the succession as a rivalry between Gezo and Badahun-a kind of 
oedipal encounter between father and son. Granted, Gew was more than 
sixty years of age by 1858 and Badahun had had enough of a taste of 
power to be ready to rule in his own right. But there is no evidence that 
there were deep divisions between Gezo and Badahun just before the 
king's death. The king had named Badahun his heir and made no moves 
to remove him from that position. Freeman described father and son in 
1856 as being "fondly attached"; Gezo seemingly withheld no secrets from 
his vidaho. And a French visitor of the period stressed the seriousness 
with which Badahun's views were heard at court.S6 
Why, then, does the reported policy split between Gezo and his son 
loom so large in European records of the time? The answer lies less in 
Dahomey and more in the British preoccupation or obsession with the 
slave trade and human sacrifice. Indeed, the diplomatic conversations be­
tween British envoys and both Gezo and Glele are eerily similar, suggest­
ing that the kings and their monarchies held essentially similar views. As 
we have seen, the Dahomean position on the slave trade had been dear 
virtually from the moment that Gew insisted that he could stop the trade 
only in Whydah: the Dahomeans, including the king. would trade slaves 
as long as buyers came along the coast. Among the signatories to the 1852 
treaty were several individuals later cited as opponents of the pact, which 
suggests that the decision to cooperate with the British, as well as the 
decision to return to openly trading slaves, was a collective one of the 
monarchy. not a policy made or upheld by the king alone. As for Gezo's 
perspective on human sacrifice. there was a persistent belief among Brit­
ish observers at midcentury that the number of persons sacrificed was 
dropping, and that the king was moving toward the drastic reduction, if 
not the elimination, of human sacrifice in the kingdom. Yet the patterns 
of sacrifice apparent during midcentury are ambiguous at best. 
The British visitors to Dahomey in the 1840S and 1850S sought evidence 
that the humanitarian efforts of their government were yielding positive 
results. Inevitably, travelers must have recorded their conversations with 
the king with an eye to their own reputations. to the mandates that they

--- Page 283 ---
266 
The Decline of Dahomey 
had been given, and to the impact that their words would have on their 
own constituencies: the British Foreign Office, missionary societies, and 
even the popular press in England. Gezo, and in his turn Glele, were 
adept at parrying British demands, or, more accurately, skilled at making 
arguments that visitors could find acceptable. For example, the Daho­
means knew that capital punishment was common in England. Following 
his first meetings with Freeman in 1843, Gezo consistently argued that the 
individuals sacrificed at Customs were all criminals, or at least war cap­
tives "who, if they could, would do the same."'7 
The belief of Europeans that only criminals were sacrificed persisted 
well beyond Gezo's death and was even used by detractors of Glele to 
emphasize his supposed brutality in comparison with the reforming 
Gezo. A French missionary who spent three years in Dahomey in the 
early 1860s wrote that "Guezo . . .  tried in part to destroy the bloody 
institutions that he had inherited from his predecessors. Sacrifices to the 
gods took place only at long intervals; each time the human slaughter was 
less great and less pure: rather than innocent people, they killed only the 
guilty." ss 
Beginning with Duncan's 1846 visit, the British believed and constantly 
repeated their perception that Gezo had drastically reduced the numbers 
of individuals sacrificed. Duncan set the tone by declaring that the "in­
telligent and generous" Gezo had abolished human sacrifice "in a great 
measure," killing only "culprits condemned to death for offenses of the 
gravest character" and refusing to allow caboceers to perform human 
sacrifice. Subsequent embassies, while regretting that any sacrifice at all 
continued, still believed that Gezo himself was a reluctant instrument of 
ancient superstition. Forbes, for example, proudly proclaimed that the 
numbers had dropped from 240 sacrificed in 1848 to only 32 in 1849. 
Twentieth-century scholars have repeated the litany of fewer sacrificed, 
sometimes going so far as to argue that fewer were killed because of the 
positive influence of Chacha de Sou1.3 on the monarchy.µ Yet this cer­
tainty that numbers of sacrifice victims had been reduced may have been 
related less to Gezo's conscience than to the European envoys' desires to 
convince their audiences of the effectiveness of their negotiations. 
In fact, we have no idea how many persons were sacrificed at any given

--- Page 284 ---
The Decline of Dahomey 
267 
moment in Gezo's era, nor do we have reliable figures for the reigns of 
his predecesors or successors. One oral tradition claims that Gezo had 
mounted his coup d'etat because Adandozan had reduced the number of 
sacrifices. Taken at face value. that tradition suggests that Gezo should 
have increased sacrifices. There was no set number of sacrifices in a given 
ceremonial cycle. and the European visitors knew that their "counts" of 
victims were guesses. Forbes himself. after asserting the dramatic drop in 
1849, again counted 32 sacrifice victims during his visit of early 1850. but 
averred that "I have no doubt many more victims were sacrificed." The 
number of persons sent to Kutome most likely varied according to the 
circumstances at a given moment. Larger numbers might be despatched, 
paradoxically, in very good or very bad years, as thanksgiving for a well­
fought war or especially abundant harvest, or alternatively as a plea for 
aid, particularly in a crisis.60 
If in fact the numbers of sacrifice victims varied, why was Gezo said to 
have reduced them? Was it reasonable that Europeans had received the 
impression that there were fewer sacrifices late in the reign of Gezo? Or 
were British visitors in particular seeing what they wanted to believe 
rather than what was happening? 
Dahomey had had a series of major wars and victories in the first two 
decades after Gezo's coup. The victory over Dyo and the ending oftribu­
tary status must have occasioned relatively large celebrations, with rela­
tively large numbers of human sacrifices. The Oyo Customs permanently 
added at least a few sacrifice victims to the toll. A series of wars in the 
18305 had ended by the early 1840S with the conquest of Mahi country to 
the north-northeast. These, too, would have been celebrated with unusu­
ally large numbers of sacrifices. In contrast, the late 1840S and the 1850S 
saw no triumphs of such stature. The only major military venture of the 
period was the 1851 atack on Abeokuta that ended in ignominious defeat. 
There followed several years when war and ritual both were relatively 
quiescent. Thus comments that European travelers of the 1840S and 18505 
heard from long-time observers of the kingdom, that the numbers of 
victims were fewer than in the past, may have had some validity. 
On the other hand, there is no hard evidence that the Gezo monarchy 
reduced the number of persons sacrificed in response to objections from

--- Page 285 ---
268 
The Decline of Dahomey 
Europeans. Nor is there evidence that Gezo sincerely wished to abolish 
human sacrifice, which had long been a fundamental religious rite. In­
deed, the principle of sacrifice in Dahomey was central, as it was in the 
ludeo-Christian tradition. The sacrifice of a human being was an extraor­
dinary offering-the greatest gift that could be offered to the gods. When 
the French forcibly ended human sacrifice after the conquest, the Daho­
rnean religious tradition continued to practice sacrifice as a sacrament, 
substituting cattle as the most valuable of creatures. And the belief in the 
efficacy of human sacrifice clearly continued into the twentieth century. 
An incident in the 1930S underlined its power. An ambitious son of Glele 
and chief of a district on the outskirts of Abomey was accused of having 
sacrificed a young girl in ancestral ceremonies, sparking an administra­
tive investigation and search for the child that ended in sorne ambiguity. 
Nevertheless, the incident unambiguously underlined the primary im­
portance of human sacrifice in the belief system of Dahomeans.61 
Finaly, factors following Gezo's death also contributed to the contrast 
between kings, because Glele through his filial piety gained a reputation 
for savagery in the first few years of his reign. Europeans had known for 
more than a century that the installation of a new king, the ceremonies 
called Grand Customs, required relatively large numbers of human sac­
rifices. Nevertheless, when the Glele monarchy performed Grand Cus­
toms in 1860, the king was roundly condemned by European critics for 
what they perceived to be a return to unacceptably high levels of human 
sacrifice. Ironicaly, Glele's Grand Customs were later believed in Daho­
mey to have been unacceptably small. On the morning of July 10, 1862, 
precisely two years after Grand Customs had been performed for Gezo, 
a severe earthquake struck Abomey. A Dutch visitor who met with the 
king later that day was told that the dead king was unhappy because the 
ceremonies for him had been inadequate. Three chiefs from the Egba 
Yoruba town of Ishagga, defeated earlier that year, were brought forward, 
were instructed to tell Gezo that Customs from then on would be better 
than ever, and were sent to the king in Kutome through decapitation.62 
Two additional pieces of evidence have been used to suggest that Gezo 
was moving toward the abolition of human sacrifice. The king forbade 
killing within the palace at the time of his death. He also exempted cer-

--- Page 286 ---
The Decline of Dahomey 
269 
tain officials from the requirement that they die when he died. However, 
that evidence could be related to Gezo's efforts to ensure the accession 
of his heir. Gezo had effectively integrated Badahun into his monarchy. 
making him one of the central figures surrounding the king. an innova­
tion that positioned the prince well for a bid for power. But successions 
were also struggles for physical control within the palace. Gezo himself 
had faced serious opposition from armed women in the palace at the time 
of his coup. Thus a decree that forbade killing within the palace could 
weD have been directed to the question of succession rather than to con­
cerns about human sacrifice. In effect, Gezo appears to have tried to neu­
tralize the palace as a factor in the succession of his designated heir. 
There is no easy explanation for Gezo's motives in exempting certain 
high officials from the requirement to die with the king. However. it 
would have had at least one important effect. It would paradoxically have 
reduced the influence of the "saved" individuals in the politics of the 
palace and monarchy. The requirement that an official die with the king 
signaled trust and confidence; such a person would have had tremendous 
prestige. and power. by virtue of the certain knowledge that she or he 
would commit suicide when the king died. Those expected to accompany 
the king in death were certain high-ranking wives. eunuchs. singers and 
drummers-in short, palace officials who were very close to the person 
of the king. To exempt officials from the death requirement gave them 
life but also reduced their status within the political system. The struggles 
of previous eras had given commoners, and powerful ahosi in particu­
lar, a more direct role in the selection of the king, and in forming the 
monarchy that would rule in his name. Officials who died with the king 
were not members of the royal family. Like the prohibition on killing 
within the palace. the exemption of officials from the suicide require­
ment would have reduced the effectiveness of certain players in succes­
sion struggles. most notably eunuchs and certain high-ranking women 
within the palace. 
What. then, was the nature of the contest at the time of the succession 
to Gezo and who was involved? The challengers were a prince named 
Huensu (or Ouinsou) and his ahosi supporter Yavedo. Huensu does not 
appear in accounts of the kingdom after the succession struggle. so it is

--- Page 287 ---
270 
The Decline of Dahomey 
possible that he was made to "disappear" after Glele consolidated his 
power.63 Yavedo, however, occupied one of the most powerful offices 
within the palace, both before and after the accession of Gle1e. Her office 
and rank in the palace hierarchy, and the individuals with whom she was 
likely allied, suggest that the 1858 succession may have been a contest, not 
between forces allied with the dead Gezo and those linked to the crown 
prince, but between the palace organization and the royal family. 
Yavedo was one of two persons within the palace who held the office 
oftononu, a title that Burton translates as "al must obey him [her]" from 
its component parts: to = country or people; non = mother, owner, or 
person responsible for a charge; nu = mouth. Yavedo's male counterpart 
was of necessity a eunuch, because the jurisdiction of the two tononu was 
limited to the palace. The tononu headed a group of officials called the 
utunon (owutunun); literally, those responsible for the body, in this case 
the body or person of the king. In essence, the utunon were officers of 
the king's household, charged with the private affairs of the king, as op­
posed to the gbonugan daho, the chiefs of the outside, who were respon­
sible for the public affairs of the kingdom. The utunon included the royal 
treasurer or storekeeper, the head of the palace guard. the doctors and 
diviners who served the king, those who took care of his personal hy­
giene, and the people in charge of preparing his food and clothing. Col­
lectively, the utunon were responsible for managing the palaces of the 
king. looking after the well-being of the king himself, supervising palace 
personnel, including messengers and palace guards, carrying on trade at 
Whydah on the king's behalf, and keeping the royal treasury and stores. 
The head bokonon, or diviners, of the king were considered part of the 
utunon, as was the kpakpa, who recruited girls to the palace organization 
in the late nineteenth century. Another prominent male member of the 
utunon was the royal treasurer or storekeeper, one Binazon during the 
time of Glele. His female counterpart was a woman named Videkalo. 
Oral traditions in Abomey assert that Binazon was the personal name of 
the kangbode or cambode, an officer seen by visitors to court in both 
Gezo's and Glele's reigns, though Burton implies that the offices were 
held by two different people. Among the responsibilities listed for the 
kangbode were control over the security of palace residents as well as 
foreigners visiting the kingdom. ķ

--- Page 288 ---
The Decline of Dahomey 
271 
Individual women among the utunon were remembered by Abomeans 
as being the most powerful of the women of the palace. Indeed, if any 
position within the palace paralleled that of a common polygynous Da­
homean's head wife, it was that of the tononu, the utunon's head. A son 
of Glele, for example, called his father's tononu, a woman named Vise­
segan, the "director" of the palace. A son of Behanzin called Visesegan a 
woman of "good character," a favorite of Glele, and a strong woman, 
though he acknowledged in classic understatement that she did not 
get along well with his father, Behanzin.6 
This, then, was the position of the women who challenged the two 
vidaho, Badahun and Kondo. Though the tononu were normally ex­
pected to commit suicide on the death of the king, both Yavedo and 
Visesegan survived their husbands' deaths. Yavedo continued to be 
prominent at the court of Glele. Burton noted that she served as one of 
the "mothers" to his colleague, Mr. Dawson, though even by that early 
date Glele had already named Visesegan as his tononu.66 Visesegan in 
tum survived the accession of Behanzin, though the new king almost 
certainly must have wished to see her dead, along with the prince that she 
supported in opposition to him. 
The 1858 accession of Glele. then, was opposed by a woman who may 
have been the most powerful woman in the palace. But what woman or 
women backed Glele? As in the case of Gezo forty years earlier, Glele 
gave no woman credit for assisting him to become king. To the office of 
kpojito, the new king appointed a woman named Zoyindi, a Yoruba­
speaker said to have been from Adakplame, six miles to the north of 
Ketu. However, Gedegbe, a diviner of Glele, claimed that Zoyindi was his 
elder sister and a daughter of the king of Save. a Yoruba kingdom that 
was located well to the north of Ketu.67 Whatever her origins, the naming 
of Zoyindi to the position of kpojito met with opposition. judging from 
a song, retained by descendants of Glele, in which the voice of King Glele 
taunts unnamed persons opposed to Zoyindi: 
Fortunately the king does not hold grudges 
Otherwise I would chastise you severely 
Because of all your intrigues atributable to your 
Jealousy of my mother.

--- Page 289 ---
272 
The Decline of DC/homey 
But what a good thing my father did 
To serve justice in raising 
Zoyindi to the rank of Kpojito. 
Unlike al the other women named to the position of kpojito, Zoyindi 
is said by Abomeans to have been the biological mother of the king. 
Whether that fact would have been the cause of the negative reactions to 
her is not clear. What is clear is that the patterns of advancement in the 
palace were such that the highest. ranking and most politically active 
women were not those with sons who might compete for the stool. We 
can assume, then, that whatever her activities prior to the accession of 
Glele, Zoyindi was not in a position of great power or influence. Like 
Gezo before him, Glele was not rewarding a woman who had assisted 
him in reaching power. Indeed, the song suggests that Glele's father Gezo 
had selected Zoyindi, just as he had selected and ensured the accession of 
his son.68 
Gezo had effectively changed the system of succession by naming a 
vidaho and helping him to consolidate power. As we have seen, in the 
eighteenth century, successions involved the struggles of coalitions of 
commoners allied with princes, of common women within the palace 
working with royal men outside it, but beginning with the reign ofGezo, 
the choice of the king would be decided weU before the death of his pre· 
decessor. Moreover, it would be made by the king and members of 
the royal family. Nineteenth·century accounts routinely say that kings 
named their own heirs, though members of the royal family claim that it 
was the royal family that discussed the virtues of possible new vidaho. In 
either case, the succession system had been altered so that the decision 
was whoUy within the royal family. 
Obviously, the fact that the succession to Glele was contested indicates 
that there was opposition to the new system. Members of the palace or· 
ganization-both women and eunuchs-had lost a good deal of power 
with the royal family's consolidation of control over the choice of king. 
Indeed, the accession of Glele confirmed a changed perception of the 
relationship between royal and commoner. If the eighteenth century was 
characterized by a recognition of the necessity of partnership between

--- Page 290 ---
The Decline of Dahomey 
273 
royal and commoner, the nineteenth was typified by royal pride and 
arrogance. More and more frequently, the interests of the royal family 
were defined as the interests of Dahomey. Rather than balance between 
royal and commoner, there began to be expressed an opposition be­
tween royal and commoner, and indeed between male and female. 
One other lesson was to be drawn from Glele's accession. Once named 
vidaho, Badahun had ben allowed, and even encouraged, to build a 
power base so strong that he could not be challenged effectively at the 
moment of his father's death. Assessing that experience, would-be kings 
in future might conclude that their best route to the royal stool would 
be through being named vidaho. But no longer would the problem be, as 
it had been in the eighteenth century, how to gain physical control over 
the palace and over one's rivals at the moment of the death of the king; 
rather, it would be how to be made vidaho long before the death of one's 
father, so that one might build an invincible base from which to seize 
power. Implicit in the changed position of vidaho was the danger, from 
the perspective of the monarchy. that a prince's power would become so 
great that he could threaten to usurp the power of the reigning king­
that he might threaten to take effective control even before the death 
of his predecessor. As we have seen, that does not appear to have hap­
pened to the monarchy of Gezo. But the possibility of an overly ambi­
tious vidaho became a problem for the Glele monarchy . ..,.,.

--- Page 291 ---
7 
War, Disintegration, and the 
Failure of the Ancestors 
The history of the royal family is by and large the history of Dahomey. 
Maurice Ahanbanw Gieie, Le Danxome 
The Rise of Behanzin  
Button does not mention meeting any vidaho during his 1863-64 visit, 
though Maurice GteIe claims that Prince Ahanhanzo had been named 
Glele's vidaho even before the 1858 death of his grandfather, Gem. By 1871. 
however, Ahanhanzo was in place and actively playing the role of king­
to-be: Skertchly met and much admired the young prince, noting that 
"A more generous, hospitable, intelligent young fellow ] never met . . .  
and J felt more at home with Hahansu than I had done since leaving 
England." As ¥idaho, Ahanhanzo enjoyed a central place in court politics 
and ceremony. However. within fewer than five years of Skertchly's visit 
he had died under mysterious circumstances, and Kondo, the future 
Behanzin, had taken his place. Maurice GIele, who is a direct descendant 
of Ahanhanzo. baldly states that Kondo caused the death of his brother. 
Other traditions claim that Ahanhanzo died of smallpox. But smallpox. 
as we have seen. was a euphemism for disorder and danger in relation 
to the kingship. a sign of irregular events that challenged legitimate 
authority. I 
Traditions provided by members of the royal family differ widely over 
questions associated with Kondo. because Kondo/Behanzin, as the last 
king of an independent Dahomey, holds an ambiguous position in the 
historical record. A king who would be destooled by foreign invaders and 
cursed by members of the royal family, Behanzin is today also honored 
274

--- Page 292 ---
War, DIsintegration. and the Failure of the Ancestors 
275 
as a resister of colonial aggression. Behanzin's descendants, who have 
occupied influential positions of political and economic leadership in 
colonial and postcolonial Dahomey/Benin. have played no small part in 
the rehabilitation of their ancestor's historical reputation. The result is a 
series of traditions, most of which justify the stances of one side or an­
other in the contested historical account of the fall of the kingdom and 
the naming of Agoliagbo as successor to Behanzin after the French con­
quest. Many traditions associated with the naming of Kondo as vidaho 
justify later events, as for example the comment of one prince, a man 
allied with the descendants of Agoliagbo, who said, "Kondo did things 
before the death of his father which he should not have done. For that, 
he had only a short reign." He went on to describe the choice ofvidaho 
after the death of Ahanhanzo as a deadlock within the royal family. "The 
king was obligated to agree with the majority of his children. There were 
two candidates for vidaho, Sasse Koka and Kondo. Sasse Koka was the 
oldest of the children born after the coming of Glele. The family met for 
two days during which Wegbelu [later Agoliagbol never spoke. On the 
third day, Glele asked Wegbelu for his opinion. He said, if you want 
peace. choose Kondo." 2 The rival to Kondo, Sasse Koka, was the protege 
ofVisesegan, Glele's powerful and ambitious tononu, and had been men­
tored in the home of Glele's diviner, Gedegbe.' 
Naming Kondo to the position of vidaho did not in fact bring peace 
to the monarchy of Dahomey. The final thirteen years of the reign of 
Glele were characterized by a continued power struggle betv.reen Kondo 
and Visesegan. Though official heir, Kondo continued to be challenged 
by Visesegan up to and following the death of Glele at the end of 1889. A 
son of Glele commented that 
since Sasse Koka's mother. Visesegan, commanded all the palace. 
one could expect to see her son everywhere. He seated himself in 
councils of the family, like Behanzin. Yet he was not of the same 
rank as Behanzin. It was only because his mother commanded that 
he could act like Behanzin, that is, like the vidaho. People began to 
ignore Behanzin and to forget that he held first place. People began 
to assume that Sasse Koka was the first. Thus Behanzin chased him

--- Page 293 ---
276 
War, Disintegration, and the Failure of the Ancestors 
away. told him to leave. that he had no right to be there. It was only 
because death had hurt Glele that he thought of Sasse Koka as a 
possible vidaho.4 
The 1875-76 period was a key transition period for the Glele monar­
chy. It was a time of profound difficulty from which it may never have 
fully recovered. Three major events occurred in quick succession: the 
death of the Kpojito Zoyindi, the death of the vidaho Ahanhanzo. and a 
crippling blockade of Whydah by the British. Zoyindi died in early 1876, 
and Ahanhanzo's death probably occurred late that spring. Major cere­
monies performed to honor Zoyindi were held in the fall of that year, 
about the same time that British warships appeared along the coast to 
impose a blockade. The blockade had resulted from a Whydah trade in­
cident precipitated by Abomey. possibly at the instigation of Kondo. and 
apparently aimed at hurting the son of a recently deceased Afro-Brazilian 
trader and rival to the house of de Souza. one Jacintho da Costa Santos. 
The monarchy's handling of the blockade was a mix of verbal aggression 
and diplomatic passivity that left the matter to be settled by Dahomean 
officials at Whydah working with European factors and their home gov­
ernments. The lack of direct and active participation by the monarchy in 
shaping the blockade settlement could have reflected a number of factors: 
Glele's personal despair at the ominous pattern of deaths, and particularly 
that of Ahanhanzo, who was said to have been beloved by him; the pre­
occupation of the monarchy with the grand ceremonies in honor of 
Zoyindi; or a certain level of ineptness at recognizing the new nature of 
incipient imperial challenge and negotiating effectively with it, an inept­
ness that in turn may have been related to the divisions at court following 
Kondo's appointment as vidaho.5 
From the mid-I870S, Glele himself effectively and literally disappeared 
from view. He appears to have been in poor health and may have become 
blind, because evidence from as early as the 1864 visit of Burton indicates 
the onset of serious eye disease. In any event, no outsider recorded seeing 
Glele from 1875 until a French visitor described him in late 1889, just 
before his death. In the meantime, Kondo and Visesegan waged their

--- Page 294 ---
War, Disintegration, and the Failure of the Ancestors 
277 
bitter struggle for control. Its substance ultimately was over which prince 
would replace Glele-the vidaho or the man championed by the woman 
described as "Glele's favorite wife." Outside observers, as they had in the 
case of the accession of Glele nearly forty years before, interpreted the 
struggle as one over policy, in this case the policy question of appropriate 
responses to the growing threat of European imperialism. We need to 
look briefly at the nature of pressures on the monarchy at the end of 
Glele's reign to understand the circumstances of the death of Glele and 
struggle of Behanzin to consolidate power. 
European Imperialism ,..". 
Three distinct political phases are discernible in the Dahomean experi­
ence of Europe from the 18405 to the 18905. Those phases paralleled by 
and large the experience of dozens of other African states. During the 
first, from roughly 1840 to 1860, commercial relations were in transition. 
As the illegal slave trade became less and less viable, Europe pressed its 
demands for other products, sparking the transfonnation of the Daho­
mean export economy to one of commercial agriculture; specifically. the 
production of oil-palm products. French trading concerns and numer­
ous coastal entrepreneurs, most notably individuals of the Afro-Brazilian 
community of Whydah, developed the bases for the export of palm oil 
and kernels. The British meanwhile were absorbed by their continued 
humanitarian efforts to negotiate the end of the slave trade and human 
sacrifice. During the second period. from about 1860 to 1880. rival­
ries grew among European powers for greater influence and ultimately 
greater control over Africa. Treaties began to be negotiated. and home 
governments tolerated increased shows of force, though they disavowed 
most efforts to commit metropolitan authorities to administrative con­
trol over African territories. Nevertheless, ambitious adventurers and 
politicians of many nationalities began to scheme and dream of expand­
ing spheres of influence, connecting already existing interests along the 
coast and otherwise extending political control. The decade of the 1880s 
saw the explosion of imperial interest in Africa, systematized at mid­
decade through the famous Berlin Conference. where European powers

--- Page 295 ---
278 
War, Disintegration, and the Failure of the Ancestors 
established principles for taking political control over African peoples 
and effectively agreed to avoid warfare with each other over issues of 
colonial territory. 
Paralleling the political changes were changes in European perceptions 
of African peoples that ultimately provided rationale and justification for 
conquest and political subordination. Scholars have traced the growth of 
pseudoscientific thinking about race and nationality during this period 
and tracked the development of social Darwinism to its culmination at 
the turn of the twentieth century. In European and North American 
popular culture, Dahomey emerged from these debates as an archetype 
of depraved savagery, its name synonymous with barbarism. By the time 
French soldiers arrived on the coast, the French press had prepared them 
to fight against the " fameuses Amawnes." Indeed, even before the con­
quest was complete, a troop of armed African women were exhibited in 
Paris's zoological gardens. Isabel Burton's preface to the memorial edi­
tion of her husband's book on Dahomey-written in mid-1893, when 
Behanzin had been defeated but not captured and the French were occu­
pying but not ruling Dahomey-is indicative of the mood: 
Thirty years ago, no Europeans were at Dahome. None ventured 
into the interior to the Court of the Savage known as King Gelele. 
His time was spent in wars, his best troops being his many thousand 
Amazons, women crueller and fiercer than men. The prisoners were 
tortured. and their throats were cut. Whenever he required to send 
a telegram to his father, a man was slaughtered, and his soul was 
despatched with it. Women were cut open alive. in a state of preg­
nancy, that the King might see what it was like. Animals were tied 
in every agonizing position to die; impaling and cannibalism were 
common, and it was impossible to go out of one's hut without see­
ing something appalling. 
At the same time that Isabel Burton was writing her preface, Dahomey 
was being featured at Chicago's Columbian Exposition of 1893, one of the 
most important of the series of world's fairs characteristic of the turn of 
the century in Europe and North America. The Dahomean exhibition in 
Chicago occupied the foot of the Midway. which ranked cultures from

--- Page 296 ---
War, Disintegration, and the Failure of the Ancestors 
279 
9. Dahomean soldiers in Paris, 1893. (CoUection Muste de I'Homme, Paris) 
least to most civilized along its mile-long length and culminated in some­
thing caled the White City. Should anyone miss the point. a correspon­
dent for a popular monthly wrote of the Dahomeans that "sixty-nine of 
them are here in al their barbaric ugliness .
.
.
 as degraded as the animals 
which prowl the jungles of their dark land."6 
Sadly, in the years leading up to the French conquest. Dahomey con­
tributed to these racist stereotypes by consistently meeting Europe on 
Dahomean terms; that is, the kingdom responded to European powers 
as if they were other states of coastal West Africa. The monarchy stressed 
its bellicosity and belligerence. defiantly trading slaves, continuing hu­
man sacrifice. trumpeting gruesome executions, and literally parading 
examples of military ferocity before the eyes of Europe. The Dahomean 
ruling elite expected European nations to respond as their African neigh­
bors did, with terror. By the late nineteenth century, however. Euro­
pean confidence in its moral, cultural. and technological superiority had 
reached a level that no non-Western nation could shake. Europeans be­
lieved that they practiced standards of hwnan behavior far above those

--- Page 297 ---
280 
War, Disintegration, and the Failure of the Ancestors 
exemplified by the Dahomeans. By dramatizing what Europe increasingly 
saw as different, exotic, primitive, savage, and uncivilized, the Dahomean 
monarchy inadvertently provided justification for the colonial conquest 
launched against it. 
Four European powers-Portugal, Germany. Britain, and France­
were involved in the shifting patterns of negotiation, threat. intervention, 
and conciliation that proceeded intermittently for more than forty years 
before the conquest. Two-Portugal and France-tried to negotiate 
protectorates over portions of the kingdom. The others were players en­
gaged by the monarchy as it parried the offers and demands of encroach­
ing imperialism.7 
Portuguese interests in Dahomey were fostered by prominent mem­
bers of the Afro-Brazilian community of Whydah. Whydah itself re­
mained the heart oflusophone culture along the Bight of Ben in and con­
tinued to be the point from which most European visitors approached 
Dahomey. Nevertheless, Whydah was losing ground to other developing 
commercial centers along the coast. As palm-oil production increased in 
the interior, the problem of transport began to be resolved along water­
ways: from the interior. oil could be shipped in canoes down the Weme 
River valley to the east of Dahomey and along the Mono to the west. The 
lagoons and creeks behind the coast allowed traffic to move to exporting 
points as far east as Lagos and as far west as Agoue. Porto Novo in par­
ticular began to flourish, as oil poured out of the Weme valley through 
its trading houses and onward through the lagoons to Badagry and Lagos 
or across a strip ofland to Porto Novo beach. 
Meanwhile. tensions were growing between the monarchy and the 
Afro-Brazilian entrepreneurs. The Afro-Brazilians had fully accepted Da­
homean authority over their lives. They were bilingual and bicultural. 
The households of their most prominent members resembled those 
of high-ranking Dahomeans. Afro-Brazilians took multiple wives, ex­
changed daughters with the king and other important princes, and main­
tained armed contingents of slaves who were sent to Abomey annually 
for war campaigns. Yet they still maintained links with Brazil and were 
loyal to Portugal as the European power of their cultural heritage. The 
death in 1849 of Gezo's great friend and ally Chacha Francisco de Souza

--- Page 298 ---
War, Disintegration, and the Failure of the Ancestors 
281 
had marked the ending of an era for the Afro-Brazilian community. Like 
all state titles in Dahomey, the title of chacha was inherited by a direct 
descendant of its previous holder, but the significance of the office, and 
its paramount position overshadowing even the office of the yovogan, 
had emerged from the close personal relationship between Gezo and 
de Souza. That relationship in turn had been founded on the slave trade. 
It had been cemented by Gezo's role as paramount producer of slaves 
from the interior and de Souza's role as mediator with European and 
Airo-Brazilian traders and shippers. Palm oil offered no such symbiosis. 
Having begun palm-oil production earlier than the monarchy and having 
the advantage of proximity to the coast, the Afro-Brazilians were in the 
position of being able potentially to derive greater wealth from the trade. 
In effect, the Afro-Brazilians as a group had become rivals of the mon­
archy in the commercial exploitation of oil palms. and in that competi­
tion they held the advantage. It is little wonder that they increasingly felt 
the pressure of closer surveillance and decreased trust by Abomey. By the 
1870S and 1880s, imperialist fever rose; the Afro-Brazilian community be­
gan to split apart as individuals made choices of allegiance-to Daho­
mey. Portugal. or France. 
French trading interests, meanwhile. had become the most prominent 
of al the European commercial interests. As the geographical configura­
tion of the oil trade moved toward interior waterways, the French trading 
houses were drawn to outlets from the Weme River valley, specifically to 
Porto Novo and to a village called Cotonou, at the closest point of Lake 
Nokoue (sometimes called Lake Denham) to the sea. In fact, an outlet to 
the sea at Cotonou, though blocked by a sandbar, offered the dosest trans­
shipment point for loading seagoing vessels. Profiting from the ambitions 
of King Toffa of Porto Novo, who came to power in 1875, the French in 
the early 1880s reestablished a protectorate over Porto Novo that they 
had negotiated and then abandoned twenty years before. Meanwhile, 
they twice rec.onfirmed in writing-in 1868 and 1878-a verbal agree­
ment with Dahomey made by French merchants in 1864 that recognized 
French rights to Cotonou. The protectorate treaties of 1868 and 1878 were 
used by the French government to legitimize their claims to Cotonou to 
their European rivals. Prior to the late 1880s, however, the French had

--- Page 299 ---
282 
War. DlslntegmUon. and the FaIlure of the Ancestors 
• 
• 
Cm. 
I 
I 
"'" 
• 
10. Dahomey and the Slave Coast at the end of the nineteenth century 
not moved to invoke key sovereignty clauses. and Cotonou remained 
administratively under Dahomean control. Like the AfroMBrazilians in 
Whydah. the French were active cultural imperialists. Roman Catholic 
missionaries from Lyon arrived in Whydah by the 186os, though the lanM 
guage of instruction, even in the French missionary schools. remained 
Portuguese until the end of the century. By the 1880s, a small AfroMFrench 
generation fathered by French traders had grown to adulthood and was 
ready to serve as cultural intermediary. and more specifically as transM 
lator, to those who would establish French rule in the area. 
Many of the French actions along the coast of Dahomey were in fact 
prompted by British maneuvers. With longMstanding commitments both 
to the east and west of Dahomey-in Lagos and the Gold Coast-the 
British took various actions hinting at an interest in linking their terriM 
torial holdings along the coast. Indeed. the French and British from the 
1860s to the midM1880s were like two boxers circling each other. conM 
stantly watching each others' moves, responding to threats, and deliver-

--- Page 300 ---
War, Disfnfegrarion, and the Fat/ure of the Ancestors 
283 
ing diplomatic jabs and feints as each sought advantage. But in a situation 
considerably more complicated than a boxing match, African political 
entities were also involved, seeking European alliances to gain leverage 
over their African rivals. Thus, for example, once Kondo had been made 
vidaho, Toft'a requested the French protectorate over Porta Novo in order 
to have military backing in dealing with Dahomey; Toffa had been allied 
with Kondo's rival, the vidaho Ahanhanzo. His own competitor for the 
stool of Porta Novo, Sonjigbe, was allied with Kondo.8 Similarly, the king 
of Ketonou, across the lagoon from Porto Novo, was enemy to Toffa; he 
welcomed a British protectorate over his territory, which controlled the 
shipping channel between the French possessions of Porto Novo and 
Cotonou. Following the Treaty of Berlin in 1885, the British and French 
were effectively committed to bilateral negotiations to resolve African 
territorial interests. Nevertheless, the British colony of Lagos would serve 
throughout Dahomey's struggle against the French as an outlet to con­
tacts with Europe. British officials in Lagos regularly received Dahomean 
envoys and, judging from the content of communications. up to 1890 
allowed the Dahomeans to believe that they might offer an alternative, in 
the form of a British protectorate, to French control. 
West of Dahomey, the Germans by 1882 had established what would 
grow into the colony of Togoland. Their contacts with Dahomey were 
commercial and began to take effect only after 1889. as war between Da­
homey and France drew closer. Trading arms for "free laborers" supplied 
by Dahomey, the Germans received manpower to help them consolidate 
their territory elsewhere in Africa. The Dahomeans at some point invited 
the Germans to establish a protectorate, but were rebuffed. Nevertheless, 
the Germans willingly provided the firepower that from their point of 
view kept at least one of their European rivals, the French, occupied.9 
As other European interests on the coast grew and as relations with 
the Dahomeans continued to be uncertain. some members of the Afro­
Brazilian community began to see a Portuguese protectorate as a means 
to reassert lusophone interests. After the French finalized protectorate 
treaties with Porto Novo in 1883 and with Grand Popo and Agoue in 1885, 
the fourth Chacha de Souza, Juliao, took the initiative to negotiate a 
treaty to establish a Portuguese protectorate over the Dahomean coast In

--- Page 301 ---
284 
War, DIsintegration, and the Failure of the Ancestors 
mjdÉ188s he received Portuguese officials from the island of Sao Tome 
and accompanied them to Abomey. The signing of the treaty was celeÊ 
brated in Whydah in the presence of the Portuguese governor of Sao 
Tome; the monarchy even offered land for construction of a Portuguese 
residence and there was talk of a Dahomean embassy to Portugal. Not 
the least of the factors associated with Dahomean enthusiasm for the PorÊ 
tuguese connection was the provision for the supply by Dahomey of"free 
laborers" to be used on the plantations of Sao Tome. 
With the Germans and the Portuguese providing the demand and the 
legal subterfuge, the 1880s thus saw yet another revival of the slave trade. 
The French, meanwhile. were increasingly disturbed over the apparent 
rapprochement between Dahomey and Portugal and their negotiation of 
a protectorate. Threatened by the possibility that Portugal might usurp 
their own declared interests along the Bight of Benin, the French recog­
nized that they needed to act to assert their rights over Cotonou. A con­
frontation was imminent, and by 1887 the pennies had begun to drop in 
Abomey. 
The War with the French  
Dahomean culture had changed profoundly in the years leading up to 
the late 1880s. Politically, a new vision of power and of who might appro­
priately wield it had affected the Dahomean power elite. That new vision 
was reflected in the religious hierarchy of the kingdom and confirmed in 
the changed process of succession, whereby members of the royal family 
exerted full control over the choice of king. Men of commoner birth had 
less and less access to offices of significance in the kingdom. while men 
of slave status who were highly skilled in divining. reaching for knowl­
edge of matters unknown and unknowable. became closely linked to the 
person of the king and to the fate of the kingdom. Meanwhile. the popu­
lation of the palace expanded. Its women ahosi were increaSingly visible 
working for the benefit of the indivisible entities that were king and king­
dom, But visibility and power were not synonymous. Dahomey in the 
late nineteenth century confirmed the theoretical arguments that Marxist 
feminist scholars would make a century later: that the overall status of 
women drops as internal slave classes grow.

--- Page 302 ---
War, Disintegration. and the Failure of the Ancestors 
285 
An older system of partnership between male and female. royal and 
commoner. was disappearing. Yet much of the past remained in the ac· 
tions and perspectives of the monarchy. Dahomean culture had changed 
a great deal. Still. there were striking continuities in the behavior patterns 
of the people associated with the monarchy as it faced European imperi· 
alism. As the health of Glele declined. the vidaho Kondo worked to posi· 
tion himself to be recognized as a legitimate power holder. Oral sources 
credit Kondo with a reputation variously described as a miracle worker. 
sorcerer. or magician. all suggesting the old idea that a king should be 
able to harness supernatural as well as earthly power. Policy decisions 
continued to be made collectively. albeit less often with the strong voices 
of commoner men or of women of the palace organization. Within the 
palace. the old system to some extent remained in place. because ambi­
tious commoner women there had no option other than history as their 
model. Women worked to forge alliances with politically ambitious 
princes, to offer them help in gaining power. and to promote their own 
interests. Ironically, it was at this point. as the appropriateness of women's 
involvement in political life was being questioned. that a remarkably re­
sourceful and enterprising commoner woman. Visesegan. became central 
in the political life of the kingdom. 
In interpretations that echo those surrounding the accession of Glele 
in 18S8, historians have argued that the struggle for power and the re­
sistance to European imperialism involved two parties representing two 
different policy alternatives: Kondo and his allies represented a "tradi­
tionalist" viewpoint hostile to any and all protectorate arrangements with 
European powers, promoting warfare and human sacrifice. Visesegan 
was head of a "progressive" faction that. for its own commercial motives, 
promoted accommodation with European expansion and opposed war 
at al costs. This tidy dichotomy does not work. It is clear that there were 
at least two strong factions struggling over power well before the death of 
Glele, but their policy differences and directions may not have been as 
starkly different as history has claimed. Both groups were preoccupied 
with the succession struggle up to and throughout the period of the war 
with the French, Both were willing to accept European protectorates, 
but only to enhance their position vis-a-vis their Dahomean rivals. In

--- Page 303 ---
286 
War, Disintegration, and the Failure of the Ancestors 
essence, the imperialist challenge could not have come at a more difficult 
time for Dahomey, because it interrupted a struggle for power that was 
never fully resolved, leaving a disunited Dahomey to fight the French.tO 
There were two major clashes between Dahomey and the encroaching 
European powers prior to the death of Glele. The first led to the cancel­
lation of the Portuguese protectorate over coastal Dahomey; the second 
involved the repudiation by Dahomey of the French protectorate treaties 
of 1868 and 1878. Historians typically argue that the crises occurred be­
cause of poor translations or misunderstandings of the original treaty 
terms; in the case of the Portuguese, it was said to be because of the 
existence of a second treaty stating different terms. But poor translation. 
misunderstanding, and substitute treaties were the least of the problem. 
The 1868 treaty with France, for example, declared that "the king of 
Dahomey . . .  proclaims the ceding to H. M. the Emperor of the French 
for no compensation whatsoever the territory of Kotonou [Cotonou] 
with al the rights that he holds in this territory with no exception or 
reserve." II It would be absurd to assume that anyone discussed the full 
extent of meanings that France might place on such a clause with mem­
bers of the court of Dahomey. The reality was that deception was a nec­
essary basis for the negotiation of protectorate arrangements; otherwise, 
no one would have signed. On the other hand. the precise wording of the 
treaties themselves does not appear to have been the central concern of 
the Dahomeans; rather, the crises of 1887 with Portugal and 1889 with 
France were sparked by issues of economic consequence that touched on 
long-term Dahomean trade policies with European nations. Those issues 
had to do with the compensation of middlemen in overseas trade ar­
rangements and the coUection of customs duties at the coast. 
Dahomey's quarrel in the case of the Portuguese appears to have been 
less with Portugal and more with the Chacha Juliao de Souza. In con­
junction with the Portuguese treaty. de Souza had negotiated commercial 
arrangements for the export of laborers-in effect, a return to the slave 
trade. The chacha himself was agent for the "contracts" of the "laborers," 
and apparently either rewarded himself with overly generous commis­
sions on each shipment of slaves or did not report fully to the monarchy 
on the financial arrangements. Someone denounced him, and de Souza

--- Page 304 ---
War, DIsintegration. and the Failure of the Ancestors 
287 
was called to Abomey in the spring of 1887. His house was broken in the 
classic manner: he and several immediate relatives died in an Abomey 
prison and al his moveable goods and slaves were confiscated by the 
monarchy. Accounts of the incident do not make clear if the protectorate 
treaty was formally repudiated by Dahomey; in fact, it was renounced by 
Portugal at the end of 1887, but mainly in response to a long series of 
protests from France. There is no evidence from Abomey that the fac­
tions competing to control the kingship differed over responses to the 
Portuguese protectorate problem.12 
The crisis with the French was another matter. The confrontation over 
Cotonou was precipitated by the European side. One of the requirements 
of the game of imperialism was that control over claimed territory be 
effective. Though the French at Cotonou had made moves that over­
stepped the normal bounds of commercial presence-for example, try­
ing to cut an opening to the sea through the Cotonou bar-apart from 
the X'ed signatures of Dahomean officials on treaties, they had never re­
ceived any real acknowledgment from Dahomey of their "legal" control 
over Cotonou. Tensions were intense between Dahomey and the French, 
in part because King Toffa of Porto Novo was using his status as a French 
protectee to taunt Dahomey, and the Dahomean army was making in­
cursions into areas claimed by Porto Novo and hence "protected" by 
France. 
In early 1889. the French began to push the issues of territoriality and 
protectorate status to a head by proposing a French customs post at Co­
tonou. The treaty of 1868 had expressly assured the Dahomeans that they 
would continue to administer Cotonou and collect customs. Now the 
French offered the Dahomeans 20,000 francs annually in exchange for 
the right to levy duties on merchandise passing through Cotonou but 
destined for their protectorate at Porto Novo. Dahomean officials on the 
coast refused to relay what they knew to be an unacceptable proposal to 
Abomey, and when letters were sent, the response was quick and un­
equivocal: the French at Cotonou should tell their superiors that Glele 
had run out of patience; he would never give up his rights to Cotonou, 
and the yovogan of Whydah and other caboceers who had signed the 
treaties of 1868 and 1878 had had their heads cut off. "Absolutely no one,

--- Page 305 ---
2BB 
War, Disintegration, and the Failure of the Ancestors 
not even the king of Danhome. ever gives their possessions to any other 
nation." However, the French persisted. and by the fall of 1889. after let­
ters and long-distance negotiations with the monarchy had led nowhere. 
they sent a relatively high-ranking official to Abomey to try to negotiate 
an effective treaty. Jean Bayol. the lieutenant-governor of Senegal. led a 
delegation to Abomey that spent six weeks, was granted only two royal 
audiences. and failed utterly to reach a new accommodation. Bayol left 
Abomey on December 28. 1889, and Glele died shortly thereafter. on 
December 30.13 
However. the Bayol Mission produced a key document. dated early 
1891, that casts both light and confusion on divisions in the court at the 
time of the death of Glele. Preserved in several copies and heavily used 
by historians. the document is a report by the mission's translator for the 
French. Xavier Beraud. Beraud was the eldest son of a French consular 
agent and a woman from Whydah. Educated in mission schools in Why­
dah. Porto Novo. and Lagos. he was fiercely loyal to France and corre­
spondingly hostile to Dahomey. Indeed, the monarchy later broke the 
Beraud house in Whydah on grounds of the "treason of the Berauds." 
Beraud's story of the actual negotiations of the Bayol Mission generally 
corresponds to accounts of Bayol himself-that the French offered an 
annual subsidy in exchange for the right to collect customs duties on 
goods entering Cotonou for Porto Novo. The Dahomeans responded that 
such an arrangement was impossible, and that if the French occupied 
Cotonou against the will of Dahomey. they would be struck by lightning; 
moreover, the treaties of 1868 and 1878 were invalid.14 
Beyond the story of the formal negotiations. Beraud offers a behind-
the-scenes account of discussions within the palace. I paraphrase it here: 
Visesegan. "the favorite of Glele who had great influence on him," 
argued to the king that times had changed. The whites wanted to 
occupy Kotonou, Godomey, and Whydah, and would pay rent to 
Dahomey, though they would stop warfare. That was the situation 
in Lagos and it worked fine. Glele replied that he wanted to con­
tinue to wage war and make human sacrifices. The Yoruba would 
make fun of him if he agreed to such terms and his father would be 
angry. Visesegan retorted that it would be better ifhe was angry with

--- Page 306 ---
War. Dlslntegratfon. and the FalllIre of the Ancestors 
289 
his father, for if the whites made war against them, what would be­
come of them? Would he expect to seek refuge in Yorubaland? Glele 
responded that he would rather die than give his country to the 
whites and poisoned himself on December 28. 
Kondo succeeded under the name Behanzin and Visesegan plot­
ted with several chiefs in the country to dethrone him and give the 
country to the whites. She was not the real mother of Kondo but 
the adoptive mother, for the custom in Dahomey is that the first 
wife or the favorite wife of the king is called Mother by the heir. Her 
fellow plotters were Binazon, Chodaton ofWhydah, a creole named 
Nicolas who was chief of the Ganve quarter ofWhydah, plus several 
others. Goufie, who met with the plotters, told Behanzin about the 
plot. Behanzin imprisoned Visesegan and the other plotters and 
seized all their goods and slaves. He excused this crime to his people 
by claiming that it was Visesegan who had poisoned Glele. 
People were sorry about the death of Visesegan, a woman who 
had much influence and in fact had exercised power in the latter 
part of Glele's reign. As a result Behanzin lost a good deal of prestige 
and authority. A rumor even reached Kotonou that a revolt against 
him was being prepared in Abomey. However, Behanzin regained 
face in May 1890 when Commandant Fournier [the naval captain 
who replaced BayolJ sent him gifts and later when a German Swiss 
named Barth came from Lagos to offer guns and cannons. IS 
Powerful and vivid, the Beraud account dramatically outlines the divi­
sions between two competing factions. The general thrust of the split 
between supporters of Behanzin and Visesegan has since been confirmed 
by oral sources. Visesegan was a woman with important commercial in­
terests; indeed, one historian claims she was spending her fortune earned 
in commerce trying to get control of the stool of Dahomey.16 Beraud 
would have been familiar with the names of the Whydah people said to 
have been in league with her. Abomey oral sources have claimed that her 
allies additionally included at least three of the gbonugan daho-the 
migan, the a;aho, and the tokpo. On the other hand, Kondo is said 
to have had the support, among others, ofWegbelu (Agoliagbo), of the 
yovogan, of a woman named Hodafo, and of the diviner Gedegbe.

--- Page 307 ---
290 
War, Disintegration, and the Failure of the Ancestors 
The Beraud account is also based on cumor and gossip and includes at 
least one stunning inaccuracy, al of which raise questions about its rela­
tive value as evidence. Its main error is the assumption that Visesegan 
had been killed. She did not die until 1912, and records of court cases in 
the first decade of the twentieth century show her still trying to reclaim 
individuals taken from her control by Behanzin. She could have tem­
porarily disappeared from view, however, after her confrontation with 
Behanzin, leading Beraud to assume that she had been killed. The state­
ment that Glele committed suicide is almost certainly untrue, although 
he could have died of poison. Kondo is rumored in oral traditions to have 
poisoned Glele, and Kondo probably had the most to gain from the death 
of his father. In fact, Glele is said to have died while Kondo was in Cana. 
Tokpa Mele, his brother, sent for him, decapitating an ahosi who had 
been a personal servant of Glele and had seen that the king was dead. 
Foul play is possible, but the king was clearly feeble and old; it is equally 
probable to assume that Glele's death at the end of 1889 was merely 
coincidence. 
The struggle for the stool had been ongoing for years. Contemporary 
French sources and twentieth-century historical sources typically offer 
interpretations of the period of the late 1880s and the early 1890S that echo 
Beraud. Dahomey is shown divided over how to respond to the French 
crisis and the succession struggle becomes a background diversion from 
the central question, that of Dahomean-French relations. Yet it is plau­
sible to argue that from the Dahomean point of view, the Europeans were 
mere players, albeit extremely powerful and dangerous ones, in a succes­
sion struggle. The task for a would-be king was to build alliances with 
one or another European nation in order to cement control and win 
recognition and legitimacy in Abomey. The actions of Kondo in the late 
1880s can be seen in this light. If we assume that Visesegan and her coa­
lition were promoting ties with the French, in order to secure his own 
power Kondo needed either to build an alliance with another equaly 
strong European power or defeat the French-militarily or diplomati­
cally. The historical record indicates that he tried both. 
In late 1888. a small delegation representing Dahomey arrived in Lagos 
and was received by the British governor. Alfred Moloney. It was led by 
Fasinu. a son of Kondo who was twelve to thirteen years old and who

--- Page 308 ---
War, Disintegration, and the Failure of the Ancestors 
291 
asked in his father's name for a British protectorate over the kingdom. 
Questioning the woman coastal trader who was escort for Fasinu, Gov· 
ernor Moloney learned that Kondo was engaged in a struggle for the stool 
against a brother, Dahpeh, who was playing for French support and 
whose power base was Whydah. Kondo wanted to isolate his rival by 
closing the roads to Whydah and using Katanu (Ketonou?), a town that 
was part of the British protectorate. as an alternative port. Ironically, 
given Kondo's reputation as warmonger, this Dahpeh was described to 
the British as a bloodthirsty captain in the army, in contrast to the "more 
mild" Kondo. Dahpeh, apparently, would be the protege of Visesegan, 
the prince otherwise known as Sasse Koka. Moloney took the protector· 
ate request seriously, reporting it to London and keeping up negotia· 
tions with the Dahomeans for more than a year. Meanwhile, though, the 
French and British were negotiating a series of settlements over potential 
disputed territories in Africa and Asia. Over time, implicit recognition of 
french claims to the areas between Agoue and Porto Novo by the British 
meant that by February 1890, the acting governor of Lagos would write 
Behanzin that "there is no longer any question of the extension of British 
protection to the Kingdom of Dahomey." 17 
Meanwhile, with the death of his father, Behanzin began moving at 
top speed to consolidate his power and position. By the time of the initial 
burial of Glele at the beginning of January 1890, Behanzin was in control 
of the palace and the standing army. Now began his period of test· 
ing, when he needed to demonstrate the power that would legitimize his 
position as king. We do not know precisely when or how Visesegan and 
her associates in Abomey were confronted; we know only that Sasse Koka 
did not survive and that the French conquering forces later heard rumors 
that he had been poisoned. At some point Behanzin named his ministers, 
rewarding his brother Tokpa Mele, who had been with Glele at the mo· 
ment of death, with the position of meu. Egbo, another brother, became 
migan. Guchili or Wegbelu (later Agoliagbo) became gau. Indeed. virtu· 
ally all of Behanrin's top officials, both male and female, were siblings. In 
January 1890, he also visited Tado, in what is now Togo, for an investiture 
ceremony, and in February was similarly in Allada for ceremonial pur­
poses. But Behanzin was not to have the luxury to establish his position 
firmly without outside threat. 18

--- Page 309 ---
292 
War, Disintegration, and the Fatfure of the Ancestors 
A rising imperial star before he reached Dahomey, Jean BayoJ had 
fallen ill in Abomey, apparently from fright and frustration. After his 
failure to negotiate successfully and his return to the coast, Bayol seemed 
determined to force Dahomey either into acceptance of French terms or 
into war. At his insistence, the French moved new troops into Porto Novo 
and reinforced Cotonou. Both were done ostensibly because of fears of 
Dahomean attacks during the dry season, when Dahomey traditionally 
made war, and particularly in light of the death of Glele and the pre­
sumed need for captives for sacrifice. Assembling all the Dahomean offi­
cials of Cotonou in late February 1890, the French announced that they 
intended to occupy Cotonou and "protect" other key factories along the 
coast and lagoons. When the officials protested, they were held prisoner 
and allowed to assume that they might be turned over to Toffa and 
executed. The French expected the Dahomeans to respond by making 
hostages of eight French nationals resident in Whydah, which they did 
three days later. Then, on March 4, a large Dahomean army attacked the 
newly reinforced Cotonou garrison and was repulsed with heavy losses. 
A month later the Dahomeans attacked but failed to overcome a French 
force at a village called Atchoupa, about seven miles north ofPorto Novo. 
Both sides then disengaged, the two groups of hostages were released, 
and Dahomey and the French fell into a long period of negotiation and 
formal agreement punctuated by occasional provocations and dashes. 
From May 1890 until the French i.nvading forces came up the Weme 
River in the fall of 1892, the Dahomeans avoided sending large forces 
against the French. Meanwhile, the local French officials became thor­
oughly convinced that the only solution to the "problem" of Dahomey 
was its conquest, but until the spring of 1892 the French parliament was 
not willing to vote the necessary funds for war. 
We have little direct evidence that can help us understand what was 
happening in the court of Dahomey up to and during the war against the 
French in the fall of 1892. The contemporary written records are limited 
to the course of negotiations and correspondence between the French 
and Dahomey. Save for the Beraud report, they say little of the succession 
struggle. Oral accounts provided by members of the royal family begin 
a scant decade after the events, the first being the account provided to

--- Page 310 ---
War, Disintegration, and the Failure of the Ancestors 
293 
Le Herisse by Agbidinukun, a brother of Behanzin. Working separately 
in the early 1970S, Luc Garcia and I collected valuable oral commentaries 
on internal debates from surviving children of Glele, Behanzin, and Ago­
liagbo. Still, it is hard for historical memory, whether oral or written, to 
imagine and convey the thinking and motivation that were involved on 
the Dahomean side, and that could not have been common knowledge 
at the time. Moreover, our knowledge of the end of the story-the ulti­
mate defeat of the kingdom and the establishment of the colony of 
Dahomey-and the sense of inevitability associated with it distort our 
retrospective thinking. Using oral evidence and our understanding of 
Dahomean culture we can speculate, though, that Behanzin and his mon­
archy found themselves in an anomalous position. They controlled the 
palace and army. and Behanzin was in the process of performing the 
requisite ceremonies for recognition of his position as king. Yet the king's 
authority in Dahomey had traditionally been earned through a prince's 
demonstration of his ability to concentrate and channel supernatural and 
physical power. It was not enough simply to have been named vidaho. 
Indeed, Behanzin as heir had struggled to have his position accepted and 
acknowledged, yet his claims to the stool had been challenged both be­
fore and after the death of Glele by a formidable rival. 
The opposition to Behanzin had argued that some form of accommo­
dation needed to be made with the French. According to Agbidinukun, 
Behanzin was aware that it would be dangerous, indeed foolhardy, to 
provoke war with the French. He resisted the incursions toward Cotonou 
demanded by his brothers, but nevertheless saw the monarchy goaded 
into war on the coast.19 Had the Dahomean army succeeded in defeating 
the French at Cotonou, driving them into the sea with the sharpness of a 
shark's attack, the visual emblem chosen by the new king, the Behanzin 
monarchy would have been vindicated. Overrunning the French garrison 
would have been seen as a demonstration of his abilities and evidence of 
the blessing of the royal ancestors on the new king. The failure at Coto­
nou made a decisive victory over the French imperative for Behanzin. A 
new plan was devised. The French would be lured out ofPorto Novo into 
an area to the north that would be unfamiliar to them. A sudden mur­
derous attack would keep them pinned down while the Dahomean army

--- Page 311 ---
29'1 
War, Disintegration, and the Faifure of the Ancestors 
made a flanking move to attack Porto Novo itself. If the plan worked. not 
only would Toffa be punished. but the French might decide to leave the 
coast of Dahomey altogether. 
As it turned out. the decisive confrontation was at Atchoupa. and the 
French realized when attacked that they needed to retreat to the unpro­
tected Porto Novo. Managing to form and hold a disciplined square. they 
held off waves of attackers. the most vicious of whom were said to have 
been women soldiers. Porto Novo was saved and Behanzin's position fur­
ther weakened. According to royal informants, "plots began to percolate 
again with even greater vigor. This time doubt even crept into the ranks 
of the dose supporters of Behanzin, and everyone began to wonder if his 
removal from office might in the end save the kingdom from certain 
destruction. "20 
Nevertheless, Behanzin managed to remain in power. How did he do 
it? Beraud's suggestion-that gifts sent by the French in May 1890 and a 
later visit by a German merchant gave Behanzin the respect he needed­
may point to the answer. Certainly, the French unwillingness to press 
militarily could have been interpreted in Abomey as weakness. and 
from the Dahomean perspective a series of incidents seemed to confirm 
French hesitation. even fear, to confront Dahomey. Behanzin had de­
manded in mid-March 1890. for example, that the French hostages write 
a letter "to the king of France" telling him that Bayol had launched an 
unjust war against Dahomey. Behanzin opined that he would long since 
have had Bayol's head for such misbehavior. Three weeks later. the French 
envoy was called home, presumably to be punished. The French pushed 
for a peace treaty that was signed in October 1890. Their motive was to 
gain time, but the monarchy may not have understood that. 
Another telling incident occurred in February-March 1891, when a 
mission of French military officers bringing numerous gifts to Abomey, 
but whose main purpose was espionage, were persuaded by Dahomean 
authorities to enter the city carrying palm branches. a public sign of sub­
mission. Later. the French wrote conciliatory letters to Behanzin protest­
ing in the mildest possible terms that the Dahomean army had attacked 
villages under French protection. This strategic retreat of the French 
must have helped Behanzin consolidate power. It appeared to demon-

--- Page 312 ---
War, Disintegration, and the Failure of the Ancestors 
295 
strate that belligerence was successful in dealing with European threats. 
But there was another factor, too. that would have favored Behanzin­
the revival of the slave trade and the prosperity, and influx of arms, that 
it brought. 
More than five thousand men, women, and children were embarked 
from Whydah during the three years from May 1889 to May 1892. They 
were sent to Belgian, German. and Portuguese territories in Africa, and 
specificaUy to the Belgian Congo, Cameroon, and Sao Tome. Both Da­
homeans and Europeans acknowledged that they were slaves. The major 
trading partners were German firms. and the largest customer by far 
was Germany. In exchange, the Dahomeans imported war materiel. By 
November 1891, the French administrator at the coast was estimating that 
at least five thousand rapid-firing rifles had reached Abomey. Mobile ar­
tillery was an important addition to the Dahomean arsenal at this time, 
as were early machine guns that had been captured from the French in 
the Franco-Prussian war of 1870. By 1892, the Dahomeans possessed what 
were probably the best and most up-ta-date imported weapons of any 
point in the history of the kingdom. The German merchants obligingly 
provided technical assistants to train Dahomeans in the use of the new 
guns. About a half-dozen Afro-Brazilians also worked with the Daho­
mean forces, and some ultimately fought with them, along with four 
Europeans who would be captured and executed by the French.21 
Meanwhile, the final funeral ceremonies for Glele, the Grand Cus­
toms. were postponed, though preparations were being made for them. 
Slave raiding and wars were carried out to the east as well as southwest 
of Dahomey to gain captives for trade and sacrifice. At the same time, 
consultations with the ancestors and gods had advised strongly against 
war with the French. However, by the spring of 1892 the French Chamber 
of Deputies had voted the modest funds needed for war. The French 
provoked an incident with a gunboat on the Weme River and the Daho­
means attacked, obligingly providing a casus belli. Insisting that his war­
riors had fired without orders, Behanzin wrote a number ofletters apolo­
gizing and offering to negotiate. But it was too late. The French had the 
funds and men to invade, and Behanzin's letters went unanswered.22 
By twentieth-century standards, the French war against Dahomey was

--- Page 313 ---
296 
War. Disintegration. and the Failure of the Ancestors 
small and brief. An expeditionary force of some twenty-two hundred 
fighters, whose goal was to occupy Abomey, departed from Porto Novo 
on August 17, 1892 and entered Abomey precisely three months later. 
Nevertheless, it was neither a simple nor an easy conquest. The French 
force was resisted virtually all along its journey up the Weme River valley 
and overland to Cana and Abomey. Despite planning the campaign for 
more than a year, the French were seriously hampered by logistics prob­
lems. Their intelligence was weak, their guides were next to useless, and 
their resupply system was inadequate, leaving them without water for 
more than a week at one point. Luc Garcia estimates the effective forces 
on the Dahomean side to have totaled eight thousand; of those, the 
standing army was roughly two thousand, one-third of whom were 
women soldiers. The Dahomean army tried an array of classic tactics 
against their enemy-predawn surprise atacks, ambushes. attempted 
ruses-along with newer ideas such as an artillery bombardment at 
3:00 A.M. and fighting from fixed positions in trenches and behind thick 
mud fortifications. Its most successful attacks were guerrilla-small, 
deadly strikes against patrols. firing on gunboats from the underbrush 
lining the Weme, shooting at European officers through the thick morn­
ing mists. The French wrote glowing reports of the bravery of the Daho­
means, and particularly the women, who, with guns in one hand and 
short swords in the other, would assault bayonet lines manned by soldiers 
literally beyond their reachP 
Midway through the war, another attempt was made to remove Be­
hanzin from power. The king was away from Abomey when his brother 
and migan, Egbo. and "his mother," apparently Visesegan. made their 
move. Rushing back to the capital, Behanzin and his allies managed to 
put down the coup and imprison the plotters. Egbo later died in prison 
"of smallpox." His house was broken and his children imprisoned. 
Abomey oral tradition implicates Porta Novo in the plot, on grounds 
of the enmity between Toffa and Behanzin that dated back to the time of 
the vidaho Ahanhanzo. Egbo. tradition suggests, had allied with Behan­
zin's old enemy Toffa as a prelude to settling with the French.24 
By late October, the French were nearing Cana and it was clear to the 
Dahomeans that they could not stop the invaders. Envoys began to arrive

--- Page 314 ---
War, Disintegration, and the Failure of the Ancestors 
297 
at the French bivouacs offering gifts and asking to negotiate, which was 
the usual form of surrender in the Gbe-speaking area. Agbidinukun told 
Le Herisse that 10,000 francs, yams, two cannons, and a finger fashioned 
of silver were sent to the conunanding officer, Alfred-Amedee Dodds. 
Meant as a gift to the president of France, the silver finger was designed 
to symbolize the linking of Dahomey to France, like the attachment of 
the finger to the hand. For the monarchy, "we thought thus to obtain the 
retreat of the solwers of the colonel for, when we had unfortunate wars 
with the Yoruba, we would give them money, and they would leave the 
country." Waiting for specific instructions from Paris, Dodds indicated 
that settlement terms would include at the least the acceptance of a pro­
tectorate over Dahomey, the payment of a war indemnity, and the abo­
lition of the slave trade and human sacrifice. The monarchy agreed in 
principle, save for the occupation of Abomey by the French. Then, when 
much harsher terms were made specific, the monarchy accepted al. Un­
able or unwilling to meet Dodds's demand for a good-faith payment of 
seven million francs, eight cannons, and two thousand rapid-firing guns 
within a twenty-four-hour period, Behanzin and his court fled Abomey, 
leaving the city aflame. For the next year the monarchy remained intact 
but invisible to the French, who stayed encamped at Goho on the eastern 
outskirts of Abomey. France had defeated Dahomey, al agreed, yet the 
kingdom had not been conquered. And for the moment, the royal family 
seemed to be united behind Behanzin, for they followed him north from 
Abomey.15 
The monarchy-in-exile set up its center at Atcherigbe on the southern 
bank of the Zou River, thirty-one miles north of Abomey along the fron­
tier of the territory under effective Dahomean control. Dahomean out­
posts and sentinels controlled the roads south to Abomey, as well as the 
roads southwest to Aja country and southeast to the region of Agonli. 
The exiles, whose numbers were estimated at between two thousand and 
six thousand persons, were supplied with foodstuffs from both Aja and 
Agonli, and farms were also cleared and worked in the area of Atcherigbe. 
The Dahomeans were able, at least during the early months of 1893. to 
reach Lagos, and despatched a delegation to Europe by way of the British 
colony to negotiate directly with the president of France or. barring that,

--- Page 315 ---
298 
War, Disintegration, and the Failure of the Ancestors 
to mount a press campaign that would turn other European nations 
against the French. As early as April, however, the numbers of followers 
of the court began to thin as people returned to their homes. There was 
illness in the camp, and provisions dwindled. Nevertheless, the Daho­
means were said to be reconstituting their army, and reports consistently 
estimated larger numbers of female than male troops.26 
In December 1892, word had reached the French that Customs were 
being performed at Atcherigbe in honor of Glele; they were not, however, 
Grand Customs, the final funeral of the deceased king, which needed to 
be celebrated in Abomey. That month, there was a literally unbelievable 
report that six thousand Nagots (Yoruba-speakers) had been taken to 
Atcherigbe to be sacrificed. In February 1893, the French heard that pris­
oners who had been incarcerated at Abomey were being sacrificed in 
ceremonies, and in April that chickens were being substituted for human 
beings. Certainly, Behanzin's relationship to his ancestors has to have be­
come a central question for the monarchy in the months after the court 
fled Abomey. How had the ancestors allowed the Dahomeans to be de­
feated in war? Had Behanzin offended them, and what must be done to 
placate the ancestors? How could it be that defeat was not followed by 
negotiation and payment of tribute? What did the French want? Should 
Behanzin take the unprecedented step of going personally to negotiate 
with them?27 
Meanwhile, communications between the monarchy and the French 
at Goho were regular and conciliatory. In December 1892, Dodds had 
formally declared Behanzin destooled, and the French searched for a re­
placement who had the authority to rule. In correspondence. the king 
consistently avoided acknowledging his deposition, though he conceded 
that he had lost the war and offered suggestions for settlements. The 
French were obliging in the early months of 1893, and even considered 
dividing the kingdom in such a way that Behanzin would be left as ruler 
over the Abomey plateau. However. the king resisted requests that he 
surrender, even though the French encouraged him to come to Allada 
rather than Whydah or Cotonou. under the assumption that proximity 
to the sea was spiritually dangerous to his person. By July. the French 
were refusing to negotiate further with envoys and demanded that the

--- Page 316 ---
War, Disintegration, and the Faflure of the Ancestors 
299 
king arrive in person. Behanzin sent messages that he was north of the 
Zou and unable to cross the rain-swollen river. 
Dodds, meanwhile, made a three-month trip to Paris to win support 
and funds for a final campaign against Dahomey. He returned with au­
thorization to assemble a military force that was slightly larger than the 
original army of invasion. Operations began in mid-October 1893 with 
four columns that were coordinated to form a pincer to capture the king. 
By early November, the French were advancing and it was clear that the 
end was near. What was left of the court and royal followers divided into 
two groups. Behanzin, fleeing with a handful of wives and children, ef­
fectively became a fugitive. The others surrended or were captured. Sib­
lings of the king and other members of the royal family were kept at 
Gcho by the French. 
What happened next is a matter of dispute. Only the end of the story 
is clear. Guchili, the former gau, or minister of war, beame king in 
January 1894 and took the reign name Agoliagbo, from a praise-phrase: 
"Watch out! The dynasty from Allada has stumbled but, thanks to the 
French, it has not fallen." The enstoolment took place at Goho in the 
presence of the French authorities and virtually all the prominent broth­
ers and sisters of Behanzin. Behanzin gave himself up ten days later, dur­
ing the night of January 25-26, 1894. 
There are deep divisions between the descendants of Behanzin and 
AgoJiagbo that date from this period and are openly acknowledged on al 
sides. Those divisions persist and have even been played out in national 
politics in the postcolonial period of Dahomean-Beninese history. What 
is odd is that the oral traditions about the accession of Agoliagbo as they 
have been recounted since the 1930S claim that there was a good deal 
of solidarity and unanimity within the royal family over the selection of 
Agoliagbo as king. In short, the oral traditions as recounted over the past 
seventy years offer no explanation for the reality of fissures within the 
royal family. The events of the moment as recorded by French sources, 
on the other hand, which are complemented by the turn-of-the-century 
account of Behanzin's brother, Agbidinukun. provide telling glimpses 
into some of the tensions that appear to have emerged after the military 
defeat of a monarchy not yet fully acknowledged.

--- Page 317 ---
300 
War, Disintegration, and the Failure of the Ancestors 
According to French military records, virtually all of the principals of 
the royal family and their entourage were asembled at Goho by mid² 
November 1893, including two of Behanzin's closest advisors, Adandejan 
and Yehome, who had served frequently as envoys between the king and 
the French. Behanzin himself continued to elude the French columns, 
and the court waited. Agbidinukun tells of meeting with General Dodds 
on November 7 as part of a delegation oftwenty³five persons. Offering to 
accept a protectorate and asking for a treaty to end the war, the delegation 
was spurned by Dodds. who said flatly. "You are only chiefs. I can't deal 
with you. Behanzin must come here." Days. then weeks, passed. Villagers 
remained loyal to Behanzin, who apparently moved easily around the 
countryside, sometimes literally in view of French troops. who could not 
distinguish him from other Dahomeans. Yet the situation was impossible. 
Dodds had made clear that Behanzin could not continue as king; some´ 
one else had to be chosen. As Dunglas imagines the scene, the court 
talked politics, and "those who were absent were always in the wrong," 
Two persons, a brother and sister of Behanzin. began to negotiate on 
behalf of the royal family. One was Tokpa Mele, who was alodokponugan 
for the royal family. the senior brother of the reigning king who served 
as titular head of all members of the royal family. The second was Yaya 
Migansi. the na daho. firstborn twin daughter of Glele and his yovogaµ 
non. She was described by the French as a "woman of mature age. of a 
remarkable intelligence {who 1 appeared to exercise a real influence on 
her brothers." After royal family discussions, Dodds was told that Guchili 
was the choice of the royal line to replace Behanzin.28 
Agbidinukun offers one of several pictures of the family meeting about 
the choice of a new king, which apparently took place at the compound 
of the war chief. Soglo, at Wawe, about two miles southeast of the French 
camp at Goho. Guchili, who had fallen into the hands of the French 
about two weeks later than other members of court. maintained that he 
had been designated by Behanzin to become king. The family members 
were wary. and insisted that Guchil i take a sacred oath swearing to the 
truth of what he claimed. The substance of the family conference was the 
process of administering the oath. Later. when Behanzin was captured, 
the royal family members discovered that Guchili had lied, and Behanzin 
cursed him.29

--- Page 318 ---
War, Disintegration, and the Failure of the Ancestors 
30 J 
In contrast, oral traditions that date to later periods claim that Behan­
zin and Guchili worked together to arrange for the gau to be accepted 
by the French as ruler. The plan was that Guchili would become regent 
for Behanzin, who would go to France to negotiate the peace personally; 
on Behanzin's return, Guchili would relinquish the stool. This version 
was first articulated by Paul Hazoume in the 1930S. He argues that when 
Behanzin heard that the French might select a prince of whom he dis­
approved, the king secretly made his way to the compound of Sogl0. 
where he met with Guchili and several of his other brothers. The plan 
was made and sworn with an oath. In order to convince the French to 
accept Guchili, the gau was to pretend that he disagreed with Behanzin 
and had abandoned the king. Other sisters and brothers would similarly 
surrender to the French and pretend to be against Behanzin. Hazoume 
thus turns evidence of strife within the royal family into theater. "The 
anger and the curses of Gbehanzin against Goutchili, when the deposed 
king learned of the submission of his brother to the French and his 
enthronisation •
.
.
.
 were reported to the general and his staff simply to 
fool the French." The effect of Hazoume's version. obviously, is to cast 
into question all interpretations that suggest that the royal family was not 
in full agreement with the actual events as they unfolded. It argues that 
the royal family did not agree with Behanzin's destoolment and was uni­
fied in its support for both men. Several later accounts drawn from mem­
bers of the royal family similarly suggest that not only were Behanzin and 
Agoliagbo in agreement, but that Soglo. the only principal involved who 
was not a member of the royal family, is to be blamed for trickery and 
treason. Others stress royal family fears that an enemy of the dynasty. 
someone like Toffa, would have been named king if the family had not 
presented its own candidate.3O 
Abomey oral traditions of the mid- and later twentieth century. then, 
have argued that a sense of solidarity within the royal family existed in 
face of the French conquest; in short. that a united royal family resisted 
the imposition of colonial rule. An anticolonial tradition had become 
important by the fourth decade of the twentieth century, but. as Luc 
Garcia points out. it "passes in silence over the treason of the direct en­
tourage of the king. as revealed in the reports, in order to retain only that 
of Soglo." In fact, Behanzin "had been abandoned by his most faithful

--- Page 319 ---
302 
War, Disintegration, and the Failure of the Ancestors 
companions." The French records suggest less a situation of treason 
and betrayal than the final scene in a long and hard-fought succession 
struggle. French interference had added a new and unforeseen element 
to the contest, and, as Agoliagbo was to learn, a king enstooled under 
French colonial authority was a king in name only. Nevertheless, the 
despatching of a delegation of "three of the most aged among the great 
caboceers" to Behanzin on January 27 smacks of succession politics. Ar­
chival records simply say that the message to the king announced that he 
was destooled and that his reign would be seen as not having happened. 
One of the French officers present at Goho recounts the bitter message 
in stronger terms: "I am charged to tell you that you are no longer part 
of the house of Allada. You poisoned your brother Sasse, you poisoned 
your father. The gods have abandoned you. Your reign has been worse 
than that of Adandozan. You have lost Dahomey. You no longer exist for 
us." The French accounts, then, suggest that at least some members of 
the royal family were not only complicit in the enstoolment of Agoliagbo, 
but made clear to Behanzin that he had been discredited and replaced.31 
One other mystery remains about the end of Behanzin's reign. Virtu­
ally al of the king's most trusted supporters were gone from him during 
the two months from mid-November to the enstoolment of Agoliagbo 
on January 15. The king then waited another ten days before surrendering 
to the French. Where was Behanzin during that period and what was he 
doing? What was happening to his tiny group of fugitives, consisting 
mainly of women and children, while decisions were being made at 
Goho? A report from General Oodds to his superiors, dated January 20, 
gives us some hints. First, Dodds notes that he received a letter from 
Lagos indicating that the messengers that the monarchy had sent to 
France in early 1893 had returned and were asking to communicate with 
the king. Was Behanzin perhaps waiting and clinging to the hope that his 
emissaries might be effective? Their news in fact was not good. No one 
except newspaper reporters had been willing to speak. with them, and 
they had failed utterly either to meet with French officials or to foment a 
press campaign against the French actions in Dahomey. Though the mes­
sengers promised that they would convince Behanzin to give up, Dodds 
refused to let them communicate with Behanzin. Interestingly, Dodds's

--- Page 320 ---
War, Disintegration, and the Failure of the Ancestors 
303 
n. King Behanzin in exile. The Icing's son, Ouanilo, stands on the right in front of Adan­
dejan. Five wives went with the king. Identified in this photo by descendants of Behanzin 
were Etchiome and Vidototc, seated on either side of the king, and Agbajaten, Agbopanu, 
and Menuswe standing behind. (Collection Mus²e de I'Homme, Paris) 
comment about the letter from Lagos indicates that the French, even 
though they were never able to locate Behanzin. were able to communi­
cate with him on a regular basis. We know, too, that communications 
continued, at least at intervals, between Behanzin and individuals who 
had submitted to the French.12 
Dodds also reported that December 30 was the anniversary of the 
death of Glele and the season for annual offerings to the royal ancestors. 
It was Behanzin's sacred duty to perform ceremonies honoring his ances­
tors. The king was known to have left Atcherigbe and traveled south past 
Abomey to the banks of the Coufo River, southwest of the capital. There,

--- Page 321 ---
304 
War, Disintegration, and the Failure of the Ancestors 
claimed French intelligence in January, "Behanzin has just sacrificed near 
the Couffo his principal wives, numerous inhabitants of Whydah and 
some of the children of his brother Egbo.» 33 
The only other indication of what was happening near Behanzin, parÕ 
ticularly in those ten final days after Agoliagbo had become king, comes 
from the period after the former king had given himself up. Behanzin 
and a relatively large entourage of wives, servants, and children were 
taken from Goho on January 28 and transported by boat down the 
Weme to Cotonou. There they stayed until February 11, when the French 
steamer Segond departed for Martinique, in the West Indies, where BeÕ 
hanzin and his companions would remain for nearly a decade. During 
the days that the royal party waited, Behanzin had a series of conversa­
tions with the French officer Tahon, who was charged with his confine­
ment and care. Tahon, sympathetic to the former king and respectful of 
him, left a memoir of their talks that provides a dramatic and moving 
account of the war and its aftermath. Here is the account as told through 
a translator. "At the beginning of the war I was protected by my father, 
the great Glegle, and I had successes. At one point, at the engagement 
at Dogba [a surprise attack on a French bivouac along the Weme, 18 Sep­
tember 1892], I even believed I would be able to push the French back 
to the sea, but from that moment on I was abandoned and despite the 
envoys that I sent to him [Glelel each evening-my bravest warriors­
nothing worked." Behanzin then recounted how the French advance 
continued, and how he and his entourage were forced to abandon Abo­
mey and the other important cities of the kingdom to flee to Atcherigbe. 
There, 
heartbroken, dispirited, I no longer knew who to rely on, being 
convinced that my envoys sent to Glegle did not complete their 
missions; I thus appealed to my aged mother and asked her to sacÖ 
rifice herself far her son and country by consenting to go herself to 
intervene with her husband. She agreed. but with the single provi­
sion that her head be cut off by me, her son, and that the execution 
take place on the banks of the sacred river, the Couffa. After the 
execution I waited eight days, then seeing nothing happen of advan­
tage ta me, and recognizing to the contrary that the French columns

--- Page 322 ---
War, Disintegration, and the Failure of the Ancestors 
305 
were closing up, and fearing to be betrayed and delivered to my 
brother who would have immediately put me to death, I preferred 
to appeal to the feelings of generosity of the French government. 
I now await my fate.34 
And thus the short reign of Behanzin ended in an act of devotion and 
desperation. 
Agollagho and the Aftermath of the French Conquest .-. 
The deposition of Behanzin by the French marked both the end of the 
succession struggle to follow Glele and the end of the independent king. 
dom of Dahomey. Having orchestrated the enstoolment of Agoliagbo, 
the French administrators of what was then known as "Dahomey and 
Dependencies" expected the new king to become a loyal subordinate 
willing to promote the French colonial project. Agoliagbo was to take 
orders from the resident (administrator) of Abomey, who in turn was 
answerable to the governor of the colony. The kingdom he was to rule 
was reduced in territory to the Abomey plateau and the Agonli region, 
an area of rich farmland between the Weme and Zou rivers. Agoliagbo, 
like his brother Behanzin, began his reign with a monarchy that effec· 
tively consisted of members of the royal family. He eventually settled his 
entourage in an older portion of the central palace in Abomey and set 
artisans to work refurbishing and replacing royal regalia lost in the war 
with the French. 
Conflict between Agoliagbo and the French was inevitable, since both 
expected to control the fundamental resources of people and land. The 
French began releasing slaves and sending them to their homes as early 
as January 1894, the month that Agoliagbo was installed. They reported 
that many of the wives of Behanzin refused to become part of the palace 
of the new king. Agoliagbo had no coercive power to force their obedi· 
ence. The king was permitted to keep a portion of taxes collected. but 
it was not nearly sufficient to match the royal income of autonomous 
Dahomey-or to keep members of the royal family content. The mon­
archy of royal siblings could not hold. Within a year of his enstoolment, 
six of Agoliagbo's brothers and one sister had gone into exile at Allada 
because the king could not provide for them. By November 1894, Tokpa

--- Page 323 ---
306 
War, Disintegration, and the Failure of the Ancestors 
Mele. who with the na daho had led the royal lineage to their choice 
of Agoliagbo as king. visited the French administrator to ask that the 
king be replaced. Agoliagbo in turn complained that three of his broth­
ers had threatened that if he did not behave as they wished. "we wil 
replace you." 3Ķ 
Problems came to a head in the region of Agonti, east of Abomey. 
Presumably in order to ease tensions on the Abomey plateau. the monar­
chy turned to Agonli for the resources demanded both by the French ad­
ministration and Dahomean cultural imperatives: porters for the French 
and soldiers for French ambitions in Madagascar; food for the funeral 
celebration in honor of Glele; and women to repopulate the palace. When 
the people of Agonli rebeUed in 1894 and 1895. the French detached the 
region from the kingdom, simultaneously complaining of Agoliagbo's 
"weak political sense and the disaffection that the Dahomean people have 
for a king so ignorant of his best interests." Later that year, the governor 
of the colony visited Abomey and threatened to replace Agoliagbo with 
a brother who might "better understand the conditions under which 
he had to exercise his prerogatives and powers." In response, the king 
appears to have worked harder to be accommodating to the real rulers 
of his kingdom. which was now reduced in size to the Abomey plateau 
alone. The French soon began to congratulate themselves that AgoJiagbo 
"seems to have given up al inclinations toward independence." Pro­
claiming the population of the downsized kingdom to be malleable and 
easily governed, the administrator of Abomey exulted that "we are per­
fectly obeyed in this region formerly so warlike; they like our authority 
and appreciate the benefits of order, peace and individual liberty." Never­
theless, Agoliagbo asserted his autonomy a final time in 1898. objecting 
to an anual tax that was to be collected by the king and levied on every­
one more than ten years of age. Confident of their authority and com­
fortable that the Dahomeans would not protest. the French responded by 
abolishing the kingdom itself. Agoliagbo was exiled to the Congo in 1900 
and the area of the plateau was divided into eight cantons. each headed 
by a chief who was either a prince of the AlIadahonu line or a close ally 
of the royal family.36 
The two central institutions of state power and authority. the monar-

--- Page 324 ---
War, Disintegration, and the Failure of the Ancestors 
307 
chy and the palace, had effectively dissolved well before Agoliagbo's un­
willing departure from Dahomey. When Agoliagbo was enstooled, mem­
bers of his family had formed a kind of monarchy, an entourage around 
the king, and offices had been awarded. But Agoliagbo can hardly be said 
to have had a monarchy in the old sense, that of a coalition of individuals 
who had sought power together and then ruled with and in the name of 
the king. Later, when the French divided the plateau into cantons, it was 
deliberately to diffuse power, to keep any single prince from claiming the 
authority of the royal stooL The canton chiefs and their urban counter­
parts, the chiefs of the quarters of the city of Abomey, set up what became 
a series of hereditary would-be fiefs ruled by descendants of Glele and 
their close associates. Each of these princely chiefs created his own mini­
court that duplicated on a much-reduced scale the old grandeur of Da­
homey, and a number of them over the years competed for recognition 
as king. As they sat in formal authority over the plateau, the collective 
body of chiefs-all male, and virtually al members of the royal family­
perpetuated the form of late-nineteenth-century monarchies, but with­
out the central and centralizing figure of a king and without the expe­
rience of common purpose that provided unity to monarchies of the 
past. 
As for the palace, relatively large numbers of its population in the late 
nineteenth century had consisted of slaves or free Dahomean women 
forcibly recruited to become ahosi. The war with the French decimated 
the women warriors, and many other palace women slipped away in the 
chaos that followed the 1892 defeat and flight from Abomey. Agoliagbo 
tried with little success to force women back into the palace organization, 
and after 1900, the canton chiefs similarly attempted to build up their 
po!ygynous households. French administrators grumbled from time to 
time about chiefs trying to extort women from the villagers under their 
authority; in fact, women themselves appear to have refused to perpetu­
ate versions of the palace in the twentieth century. As late as the 1970S, 
various women described life within the households of canton chiefs as 
lacking in opportunity and interest. Many women coerced into marriage 
with a chief, I was told, would use their talents and energies to flee and 
then negotiate marriages with other men.

--- Page 325 ---
308 
War, Disintegration, and the Fa/fure of the Ancestors 
But despite the disappearance of the two central organs of the king­
dom's authority and power, vestiges of the old system remained. as did 
signs of a continuation of trends and processes that were operating in the 
days of the kingdom. For example. the men of the royal family continued 
the nineteenth-century trend toward the exclusion of women from the 
exercise of power. Colonial authorities were predisposed to consider 
women's participation in politics inappropriate, and princes clearly did 
little or nothing to clarify women's earlier roles to the French. Both com­
moner women of the palace and princesses had been central to public 
affairs in the eighteenth century and had been losing their prerogatives, 
rights, and good repute toward the end of the nineteenth. Yet documents 
surviving in the Benin National Archives suggest that women were in fact 
still attempting to engage the colonial authorities and participate in po­
litical negotiation. For example, in 1904 Le Herisse, then administrator of 
Abomey, forwarded correspondence to the French governor related to a 
group of princes who were pressing the administration to reinstate the 
kingship. Among the letters was one in which Prince Gbohayida dis­
cussed strategies with Prince Aho, warning "another piece of advice 
I have to give you, is not to bring any women with you any more, as 
you did the other day in meeting the administrator of Abomey, because 
women these days have confused and complicated nearly all of our busi­
ness." 37 Similarly, occasional references appear in the archives to the four 
wives of Behanzin who returned to Abomey following the deposed king's 
death in Algeria. where he had been transferred in 1906. The women fre­
quently met with the administrator of Abomey, usually to urge the return 
of Behanzin's remains to Dahomey. Reports make clear that the French 
saw them as a nuisance. What is telling of the Dahomean perspective, 
though, is that the women do not appear to have been accompanied by 
any other members of the royal family in their visits to the colonial au­
thorities. In short, they were not visibly backed by the princes, who were 
in positions of civil authority in the French administration and who 
would have been the expected supporters for missions of this nature. Is 
this evidence of continuing hostility toward those closest to Behanzin? 
Or is it an indication of princely unwillingness to cooperate with women 
who formerly held important positions in the palace?

--- Page 326 ---
War, Disintegration, and the Failure of the Ancestors 
309 
Royal authority and prestige remained dominant on the Abomey pla­
teau in the twentieth century in part because the colonial state preserved 
and supported it. French power had superceded the power of the Alla­
dahonu, and over time Dahomey and its populations would be pro­
foundly changed by the colonia1 enterprise. But one striking element of 
the colonial period is the degree to which the French accepted and be­
came part of Dahomean patterns of power relations. Decisions made in 
colonial courts of law in Abomey in the first decade of the twentieth 
century, for example, consistently sought a middle ground in which the 
authority of members of the old regime was preserved while a degree of 
personal choice was permitted to former slaves and other dependents. 
Two cases involving high-ranking women are indicative. 
In 1906, Visesegan, the favorite wife of Glele and nemesis of Behanzin. 
went to court to claim as hers the children of a woman named Djoleme. 
Djoleme had been a slave purchased by Visesegan during the reign of 
Glele and kept within the palace organization; she had secretly taken a 
lover and become pregnant. When found out, Djoleme and the lover 
were both imprisoned. Freed when the French conquered Abomey. the 
young woman was then kidnapped into Aja country. The lover found her 
there and brought her back to Abomey. She and the lover then lived 
together "with the coosent of Visesegao" and she bore her mate three 
more children. Visesegan argued that because Djoleme was a dependent! 
slave who had not been married with proper payment of bridewealth, 
the children were members of her household. Le Herisse, the adminis­
trator of Aborney at the time, ruled that since technically slavery no 
longer existed. Djoleme was free. However, since the young woman had 
no other family, he asked that she recognize Visesegan as her mother. 
Djoleme agreed, which legitimized Visesegan's claim to control over the 
children by continning the younger woman as a member of Visesegan's 
household. A daughter of DjoJeme's was sent to reside with Visesegan and 
serve her. 
In another case, the Kpojito Agontime appeared in court to ask per­
mission to give a girl named Bodjo over to the control of a vodunon or 
priestess of the cult of Nesuhwe. Bodjo was the daughter of a woman 
named Nasi, who was "under the power of the Kpojito," a euphemism

--- Page 327 ---
J I 0 
War, Disintegration, and the Failure of the Ancestors 
for slave status. The spirit of the Kpojito Adonon had possessed Nasi. 
the mother. and Agontime argued that Adonon would later mount the 
daughter as well. The court effectively supported Agontime's rights by 
ruling that giving Bodjo to the priest would be slavery and could not be 
allowed; however, Agontime had the right to give the girl in marriage 
and receive the bridewealth payments. The court records can be read for 
many signs of continuity and change on the Abomey plateau, and for 
indications of women's attempts to have the colonial authorities confirm 
their previous autonomy. At the same time, though, they speak elo­
quently to the complexity of interpersonal negotiations of status in the 
colonial period, and of French efforts to preserve older status relations.l8 
There is a final telling example of the ways in which the French colo­
nial authorities were co-opted into Dahomean forms of political rela­
tionship. Princesses and women dependents of the royal family in the 
colonial period became wives of French administrators, creating ties of 
cooperation and kinship that echoed the old patterns of interaction with 
neigboring states, with European slave traders resident in Whydah, and 
with the Afro-Brazilian elites. Branches of the royal family that descended 
from the nineteenth-century monarchs in particular maintained and en­
hanced their positions in the colonial state through cultivating ties with 
colonial administrators in this way. Often, those ties were strengthened 
through marriage.'9 
The most compelling example of the way that the colonial system be­
came Dahomean, a story that is yet to be told in full, concerns the chil­
dren of Behanzin. M was usual when an individual was discredited in 
Dahomey, the wives, children, and other dependents of Behanzin appear 
to have shared in the shame of their father at the moment of his des tool­
ment. Scattered in the wake of the conquest, their mothers refusing to 
enter the palace of Agoliagbo, they nevertheless maintained some sense 
of cohesion. By an astute strategy of marrying some daughters to French 
administrators, sending some sons to serve in the French military, and 
educating family members to understand and participate in the emerging 
order, the Behanzin branch of the royal lineage gradually reconstituted 
itself, emerging as a leading family in late colonial and postcolonial Da­
homey. Alliance and accommodation through marriage was of course an

--- Page 328 ---
War. Disintegration. and the Failure of the Ancestors 
3 1 1  
old stategy in Dahomey. Its operation in the early twentieth century was 
an echo of the earliest days of the kingdom, when a beleaguered group of 
strangers needed and used the talents of all-women, men, strangers, 
and friends-to create a nation. That observation brings us both to the 
beginning and the end of our story. But it may also point to an important 
object lesson in how unity needs to be built and maintained within an 
imagined community that we call a nation-state . ...",.

--- Page 329 ---
• 
, 
8 
Reprise 
Dahomey was born as a by.product of the Atlantic slave trade. Its found­
ers forged a kingdom on a small plateau north of the state of Allada, in 
an area subject to the dangers and insecurities brought by slave raiding. 
The peoples of that Abomey plateau shared an identity that they continue 
to share, even though, paradoxically, the composition of the population 
was constantly changing over the course of the roughly two hundred 
years of the known history of Dahomey. It was an identity built of a 
shared language family and common historical experience, of cultural 
ties extending probably as far as the area we today call Ghana. But a 
collective identity does not preclude tensions. Dahomey was built by 
conquest-village by viUage, household by household, individual by in­
dividual. Its founders were intruders on the plateau, outsiders with am 
bitions that they carried out through military means. Whether or not 
they were kinsmen, the founders of Dahomey at some point accepted 
and acknowledged one lineage among themselves-the A1ladahonu -as 
hereditary ruJers, and a male leader of that lineage as king. 
The Alladahonu kings ruled with and through two key overlapping 
institutions. The first was the monarchy-a coalition of powerful indi 
viduals closest to the king who acted as ministers of state and close ad 
visers. The second was the palace-the thousands of persons who made 
up the household of the king and managed the affairs of state. Certain 
women were simultaneously members of both institutions. Individuals 
in the monarchy and palace exercised power in the name of the king. But 
the king himself was neither a cipher nor a despot. Individuals who be 
came king were not simply thrust into power, nor did they seize power 
and rule absolutely. Rather, a small number of sons of a king were poten 
tial kings. The men who became king proved their merit through dem 
onstrating their leadership abilities-to attract followers, to form alli 
3 1 2

--- Page 330 ---
Reprise 
313 
ances with individuals of talent and ambition, to garner the support of 
supernatural powers, and to win and hold power with the people who 
would become their governing coalition. Some Dahomean kings, their 
monarchies, and their palaces governed with particular skill and acumen; 
others made poor decisions or let matters drift. In either case, agency, 
the question of who acted and made decisions. never lay wholly in the 
hands of any one element: king, monarchy. or palace. Rather, the balance 
among the individuals who made up those institutions was constantly 
being renegotiated. 
Over time, there were dramatic changes in the origins and gender of 
the individuals who made up the monarchy and palace. Though the 
changes were gradual, they contrast starkly when compared at mid­
eighteenth and mid-nineteenth century. At the earlier moment, Daho­
mey was effectively at its height. Having more than doubled its size in the 
1720S, the kingdom had faced constant security crises as it tried to main­
tain control over the coast and survive attacks from the powerful empire 
of Oyo to the northeast. The task of the monarchy and palace of the early 
eighteenth century was consolidation and integration -consolidation of 
territory and administration, and integration of outsiders into the insti­
tutions of state. By mid-eighteenth century, stability and prosperity had 
been achieved. Dahomean military power had been sufficient to protect 
the earlier conquests, and a political settlement with Dyo had allowed 
Dahomey to trade tribute for an end to invasions of the Abomey plateau. 
The slave trade was bringing luxury imports along with integration into 
a broader, international, capitalist commercial system. Religious insti­
tutions were quiescent and ritual accommodations were in place that 
bound the ruling invaders to the previous politicoreligious authorities. 
How had this been achieved? The state grew through co-opting the 
services of many: members of the royal family, people who lived on the 
plateau before the arival of the Alladahonu and their companions, and 
individuals captured in war or purchased in the slave trade who for vari­
ous reasons were kept within the kingdom. Those who participated at the 
centers of power and came to be part of the monarchy and palace in­
cluded women as well as men, royalty, commoners, and slaves. There 
were generous rewards for the powerful in the kingdom: titles, imported

--- Page 331 ---
3 1 4  
Reprise 
goods, land, tribute-paying villages. wives and slaves. and rights to trade. 
which promised even more wealth. Twentieth-century Dahomeans de­
scribed the kingdom as a meritocracy, and that interpretation by and 
large fits the evidence of the eighteenth-century kingdom. Individuals 
outside the special circle of royalty earned their rewards through loyal 
service to the palace and monarchy. Nevertheless, members of the royal 
family had rights by birth to portions of this largesse; a monarchy that 
failed to provide generously for the king's siblings did so at its peril. 
Women had arguably reached a pinnacle of power and influence by 
mid-eighteenth century. At its high point. the former captive from Aja 
country, Kpojito Hwanjile, ruled in tandem with her protege, King Teg­
besu. Openly acknowledged as one of the keys to Tegbesu's successful 
climb to the royal stool. Hwanjile was instrumental in reordering the 
deities and their earthly servants, the priesthood, under state control. 
The ideological vision of the monarchy ofTegbesu's time was reflected in 
the other world. Kutome, where Hwanjile placed a pair of creator gods. 
Mawu and Lisa. to reign supreme. Like Hwanjile and Tegbesu. Mawu and 
Lisa were neither siblings nor spouses. but rather a female-male pair who 
worked together to create and recreate the world. The model of royal 
succession demonstrated by Hwanjile and Tegbesu typified the age. At 
the center of lting making was the palace. Ambitious princes of necessity 
had to be linked to women of the palace: it was the women who held the 
balance of power in succession struggles, who had the ability to assist one 
coalition or another to win physical control. and to have the name of 
one particular prince uttered and accepted as his father's choice. Later, 
when a new king's position was secure. it was palace women who advised 
and counseled kings. It was likely also women in the palace who were 
instrumental in recruiting brothers, fathers. and other talented men to 
become ahosi for eighteenth-century kings. 
Dahomey at mid-nineteenth century at first glance appeared even 
stronger than a hundred years before. Its king was the vigorous Gezo. 
who had alied with Afro-Brazilians on the coast to seize power from a 
man said to have been both incompetent and cruel. Seemingly open to 
influence from Europe. Gezo was courted by European envoys seeking 
the cessation of the slave trade and pursuing advantages in the emerging

--- Page 332 ---
Reprise 
3 1 5  
commerce in palm oil. The transition in major exports from slaves to 
palm products was being made with little apparent social or political dis­
ruption. Dahomey was well known as a military power and boasted a 
unique army of women that was widely feared in the region. Freed from 
Oyo suzerainty, Dahomey was still absorbing outsiders and their culture 
and was being visibly enriched by Yoruba-speaking peoples who had 
fallen victim to the warfare beyond the kingdom's eastern frontier. 
But the story of the nineteenth century is one of appearances and de­
ceptions. In retrospect, one senses a certain desperation at the center, a 
fear that control was being lost. Royal revenues from the overseas trade 
had declined and the imported goods that were needed to demonstrate 
prestige and attract clients were harder to come by. The transition from 
slaves to palm oil was placing the ruling coalition of Dahomey at a seri­
ous disadvantage. Coastal plantations owned by Afro-Brazilians were far 
more convenient to shipping points than was the Abomey plateau, and 
small producers might process and sell palm-oil products outside of royal 
control. By mid-nineteenth century, the monarchy was responding to 
the decline in resowces by moving toward greater coercion: taxes were 
increased and collected with greater rigor; there was stricter surveillance 
of individuals with state responsibility; and larger numbers of women 
and slaves were being put to work on production for the royal treasury. 
Militarism was increasing, even though by mid-nineteenth century the 
only state strong enough to overrun Dahomey, Oyo, had long since dis­
appeared. 
Most importantly, the centers of power were being reconfigured. Gezo 
had instituted changes in both the monarchy and the palace. He had 
come to power from outside the system, with the support of a coalition 
of his siblings and a group of Afro-Brazilian traders. Gew opened the 
way to greater royal influence by naming brothers and sisters to his mon­
archy alongside the commoners who were the usual officials of the king­
dom. With the demands of the royal family for support a given, and with 
resources continuing to decline, it had become efficient to name brothers 
and sisters to high office. Once the precedent was set, his successors 
would name members of the A1ladahonu royal lineage to their monar­
chies and depend far less on commoners or slaves, and particularly on

--- Page 333 ---
3 / 6  
Reprise 
those commoners from within the territorial limits of Dahomey. During 
the nineteenth century, fewer and fewer men and women of talent out­
side the royal lineage were welcomed to power. 
At mid-nineteenth century. Dahomey was still absorbing neighboring 
peoples and their cultures. But they were arriving in larger numbers than 
in earlier periods and they tended to be exclusively Yoruba-speaking. 
Though many were integrated into households and communities, many 
others remained permanently and visibly in slave status, working on 
palm-oil plantations that were being created on the Abomey plateau. 
The Dahomean army. female as well as male. was increasingly staffed 
with Yoruba-speakers. As in the past, some of the newcomers reached 
the highest levels of influence in the state; increasingly, however, these 
powerful individuals were males. who rose through their knowledge of 
the occult. applying their skills as bokonon or diviners of the Yoruba­
derived system of Fa. By midcentury, women advisers to the king were 
beginning to find their roles challenged both by brothers of the king and 
by his bokonon. 
Paradoxically, within the palace women were more desired yet increas­
ingly distanced from power. The population of the palace had increased 
dramatically in the first half of the nineteenth century. But it was the 
labor of women that was sought, as women increasingly were being 
brought into the palace organization to process palm oil, to work at 
numerous other royal industries, and to fil the ranks of the army. Mean­
while, women's participation on the highest political levels was being 
systematically eroded. The palace appears to have resisted Gezo's coup, 
or at best, the palace did not produce large numbers of women who 
actively advanced his cause. Gezo had taken a crucial step that dimin­
ished women's powers by altering the succession process. Beginning with 
Gezo's choice of heir, nineteenth-century vidaho were selected by the 
royal family and groomed for power. Princes no longer needed to build 
coalitions in alliance with powerful women of the palace. Mentored by 
male elders in the royal family, they consolidated their monarchies well 
before the death of their fathers. 
There were, however, still influential and powerful women within the 
palace. For example, Visesegan already held an important office at mid-

--- Page 334 ---
Reprise 
3 1 7  
century. Later, she would lead the opposition to Behanzin, operating in 
the old way by allying with a prince to seek control with him. Apparently 
intimately linked to Glele through ties of deep trust, she spoke with the 
authority of the king. Yet she and her faction lost their bid to win ascen­
dancy' and Behanzin in 1890 became the third successive nineteenth­
century king to gain control of palace and monarchy without the ac­
knowledged help of palace women. 
To argue that this process of social change in a political elite was oc­
curring. I have taken oral accounts and the words of nineteenth-century 
travelers and read through them. looking for other meanings behind 
their words. Europeans' conversations with King Gezo, for example, were 
rich in deceptive meanings. In the 1850S. Gezo reassured visitors that 
he had stopped selling slaves overseas. He spoke a technical truth. even 
though his alter ego, Gakpe, still traded, and even though the principle 
that the slave trade was an acceptable form of commerce remained un­
changed. GezD also told visitors that only criminals were sacrificed at 
Customs. He was correct, because captives of warfare were by definition 
enemies, and hence criminals. Europeans and some historians heard, 
however. that only people who had committed grievous crimes were con­
demned to be sacrificed. Gezo insisted that his women warriors could not 
be asked to cultivate the soil. He was right, because their status as soldier 
freed them of the drudgery of farm labor. But Gezo knew full well that 
his was an agricultural nation, and that most of his subjects spent their 
time farming. 
There were other signs in nineteenth-century Dahomey that what was 
being said or seen masked other realities. Customs showed the court as a 
state at work, but it was also political performance. The emphasis on 
military power and might. with high officials at court performing mili­
tary dance and women warriors storming make-believe defenses, made 
Dahomeans appear a violent and war-loving people. Yet the army that 
fought was made up mainly of slaves, and its pattern of success in the 
nineteenth century differed little from the past. The equilibrium between 
royal and commoner typified by the royal dyad, king and kpo;ito, was 
visible in the ceremonial life of the kingdom in the nineteenth century. 
Indeed, balanced complementary opposites at the court of Dahomey

--- Page 335 ---
3 1 8  
Reprise 
were seemingly without end: king and kpojito, male ministers and female 
ministers, officials of the left and officials of the right, the inside (the 
palace) and the outside (the kingdom as a whole). Following the lead of 
the royal oral tradition, twentieth-century historians have enshrined in 
their analyses that vision of complementary doubles and the necessity 
for inclusiveness: man and woman, royal and commoner, Dahomean 
and foreigner. Yet the ideology of complementarity performed publicly 
masked a changing religious hierarchy that reflected more accurately the 
political realities of the late nineteenth century. 
Religious life in Dahomey was manipulated by the monarchy in the 
belief that the world of the spirits, Kutome. was a mirror image of the 
visible world of humanity, Gbetome. The reordering of the hierachies of 
the gods by successive monarchies can be read as intellectual history that 
reveals the changing conceptions of power relations by those at the king­
dom's center. If Mawu and Lisa, the creator gods of the mid-eighteenth 
century, represented a vision of complementarity and partnership, Zu­
madunu, who supplanted them in the nineteenth century, represented 
the arrival of royalty as solely supreme. Zumadunu was a monstrous 
tohosu, a king of the waters. Yet Zumadunu was not just a spirit-king but 
the son of an earthly king, a creature said to have been fathered by King 
Akaba and hence eligible to rule as king on earth. Every king after Akaba 
was linked to a tohosu double, a fearsome being who embodied the 
supernatural powers said to be within the control of the king. All the 
tohosu and all the other deities, royal and popular, by the late nineteenth 
century were aligned under Zumadunu, who reigned as supreme deity. 
By that point, commoner tohosu were being recognized and honored, 
yet all under the aegis of branches of the royal family. In effect, the vodun 
also were participating in the strict social hierarchy and tighter control 
over Dahomean life that was characteristic of the period. Part of the hier­
archy, yet in a sense outside it, lurked Fa, the deity of divination. Present 
in the eighteenth century but only as one of a number of competing 
vodun of divination, Fa moved to center stage in the nineteenth. It was 
only through divination-and ideally Fa divination-that humanity was 
able to know the unknown, to have a communications link with the in­
visible, to come into direct contact with the vodun. Decisions large and

--- Page 336 ---
Reprise 
3 1 9  
small were dependent upon the good offices of Fa. But more importantly, 
Fa offered men knowledge of their personal destiny. Fa and Zumadunu 
together proclaimed the centrality of the male within the royal lineage. 
How and why did the people of Dahomey, women and commoners, 
accept this changing religious ideology? Behaviors can be forced and co­
operation to some extent coerced, but spiritual beliefs persist, sometimes 
the more strongly the greater their suppression. The monarchy allowed 
the so-called popular vodun to persist, and thrive, in Dahomey. They and 
their priests were accommodated with grants of land and financial sub­
sidies. In exchange, the monarchy exercised a degree of control over their 
leadership and their ceremonial life. With the possible exception of Gu 
(the Yoruba Ogun), who was directly linked to the war-making power of 
the state in the nineteenth century, none of the popular vodun was closely 
tied to the central government in the way that Shango, for example, was 
linked to the strength of Oyo. In fact, Sakpata, the deity commonly as­
sociated with smallpox, was a focus of opposition to the monarchy. That 
opposition, as Sakpata, took the form of a questioning of the legitimacy 
of the dynasty. 
Legitimacy was a question that ran like a stream through the king­
dom's history, sometimes as quiet and still as a river at the end of the 
dry season and sometimes flooding with the violence of torrential rains. 
Questions of legitimacy were raised at several levels: the right of the 
dynasty to rule; the right of the state to establish its authority over kin 
groups; and the suitability of an individual to become king. Successions 
were periods of flood, when the monarchy was recreated through violent 
struggle at the center, involving the palace, powerful outsiders, and the 
royal family in the choice of a man to rule as king. Successions and their 
immediate aftermaths also were periods when broader questions of le­
gitimacy were raised, particularly in the eighteenth century, about the 
dynasty's right to rule. Signs of unrest and rebellion, which typically 
emerged early in the reigns of new kings, were expressed at least in part 
through religious movements and metaphors. The creation of the office 
of kpojito. for example, provided a ritualized accommodation between 
the intruding founders of Dahomey and the older owners of the earth. 
The reordering of the hierarchy of the gods during the reign of Tegbesu

--- Page 337 ---
320 
Reprise 
and the concessions made to the vodun and their priests spoke of re­
sponses to challenges to the legitimacy of the dynasty. And at the end of 
the eighteenth and beginning of the nineteenth centuries. the followers 
of Sakpata appear to have contested the right of the Alladahonu to rule 
Dahomey. Sakpata's strength was effectively acknowledged through the 
distance that the monarchy kept from the vodun and the regular use of 
Sakpata as metaphor for disorder and political danger. 
Tensions between the state and kin groups were constant, too, because 
loyal service to the monarchy undercut allegiance to kin groups. For ex­
ample, state titles with their accompanying wealth overshadowed lineage 
elders and their authority. The population of the palace was a social mi­
crocosm of the kingdom. one that tied kin groups to the state, willingly 
or not, and held out the promise of wealth to be gained by the colJectivity 
should their kinswomen reach high levels of power. Moreover, the palace 
acted as a conduit of information between the center and the population 
at large. enabling the monarchy to tap popular reactions and to convey 
its own perspectives to the populace. In the late nineteenth century, the 
monarchy effectively tried to supplant the sacred basis of lineage ties by 
realigning family rituals and integrating them into the various branches 
of the royal family. 
The Alladahonu lineage had arrived on the Abomey plateau as part of 
a small band of strangers. With skill and determination they had built 
a state, expanding their own ranks by integrating peoples of relatively 
diverse backgrounds into their lineage and dependency relations. Their 
wealth was human-their children and dependents, their slaves sold 
overseas or kept at home, their human offerings to the ancestors and 
gods, and their tributary peoples who brought annual gifts. At their most 
successful, they had fostered opportunities for strangers and slaves, com­
moners and captives, men and women; all these could share in wealth 
and power through the monarchy and the palace. They had eagerly en­
tered and embraced a system of commercial capitalism that offered rich 
rewards but was beyond their control. When the system changed. and 
opportunities narrowed, they reacted by consolidating, contracting their 
sights to the narrow interests of their lineage, and limiting power to their 
men. State power in the end in Dahomey became wholly dynastic and

--- Page 338 ---
Reprise 
321 
patriarchal, its exercise limited to male members of the royaJ lineage. Yet 
at that very moment, Dahomey itself was being absorbed into the larger 
imperialism of Europe. It would become the task of the descendants of 
the Alladahonu and their neighbors nearly a century later to create anew 
a polity in which individuals of talent and skil, whatever their back­
ground or sex, might play a role.""'"

--- Page 339 ---
BlANK PAGE

--- Page 340 ---
Notes 
Chapter I ""'"' Along the Slave Coast 
I. Gayibor, "Memoire," 53. Other prominent apologists for the slave trade 
include Snelgrave. Smith, and Dalul. Strongest among the abolitionist voices is 
Atkins. For a discussion of abolitionist and antiaholitionist perspectives, see Law, 
"Dahomey." 
2. Quenum, Pays, 19. 
3. An exception to the pattern is the palace and shrine to Akaba. traditionaUy 
known as the second king of Dahomey, located to the north of the central palace 
complex. Law has argued that this physical evidence, along with a king list col­
lected by Norris in the early eighteenth century, show that the remembered order 
of kings is mistaken, and that Akaba in fact was the first Dahomean king ("History 
and Legitimacy" ). 
4. Mercier and Lombard, Guide. 9. 
5. Hazoume, Cinquante ans, 33. 
6. ASA, Commandant. 
7. Hazoume, Pacte, 18-31. 
8. Le Herisse, Royaume, 158-59, W9. 
9. Forbes, Dahomey, 1:77. 
10. Dalzel, History, 117-18; Mercier and Lombard, Guide, 14-15. 
11. Hazoume, "Tata Ajache;" Morton-Wiliams. "Yoruba Woman." 
12. fones discusses the complex possible meanings of observations repeated by 
several travelers in "Semper A1iquid Veteris." 
13. Bulfinch Lamb's letter to Jeremiah Tinker, "From the great King Trudo 
Audati's Palace of Abomey, in the Kingdom of Dahomey in 1724.," is printed in 
two sources: Smith. New Voyage, 171-89, and Forbes, Dahomey, I: appendix A. 
Lamb in 1731 delivered a letter purportedly dictated to him by Agaja to the court 
of George I of England. The British Commissioners for Trade and Plantations, to 
whom it was submitted, declared it a forgery. Even as such, it reflects Lamb's 
observations from his sojourn in Dahomey. It is reprinted in Law, "Further 
Light." 
14. r am grateful to Robin Law for providing a copy of"Reflexions" for my use. 
1 S. The two-volume Dahomey is the central work produced by Herskovits on 
Dahomey. Maupoil notes errors in infonnation provided by Herskovits's principal 
323

--- Page 341 ---
324 
Notes to Pages 34-50 
informant in "Geomancie," 65, fn. 1, and 75, fn. l. Blier criticizes his field methods 
in "Field Days." 
16. E.g., Polanyi, Dahomey; Sacks, Sisters. 
17. Law has pointed out that even in the precolonial period, Dahomeans 
drew on written records of the past to discuss contemporary issues, citing prece­
dent from the written works of various Europeans ("History and Legitimacy," 
432-34). 
18. Law, "History and Legitimacy," 434-35. See aJso Lombard, "Moyen," 152. 
19. For a discussion of perpetual kinship and positional succession, se Van­
sina, Kingdoms, 27. 
Chapter 2 .-". From Dahomey's Origins to 1 740 
1. Le Herisse, Royaume, 2. 
2. Skertchly. Dahomey, 36. 
3. Le Herisse, Royaume, 47-48. 
4. Maning estimates that 90 percent of alJ slaves exported from the Bight of 
Benin were Gbe- (Aja-) or Yoruba-speaking peoples and hence from areas within 
120 miles of the coast (Slavery, Colonialism, and Economic Growth, 32). 
5. Norris estimated that the speed of his hammock was at least five miles an 
hour (Memoirs, 140) . 
6. Smith, New Voyage, 192-93-
7. "Captain PhiLlip's )ournaJ," 218. 
8. Robertson and Klein suggest an overall ratio of two or three men to each 
woman (Women and Slavery. 4). Geggus argues that the overall proportion was 
somewhat lower, in the range of 179 males to toO femaJes ("Sex Ratio"). Law 
similarly describes relatively high proportions of maJes to femaJes for the area 
around Whydah for just before the turn of the century (Slave Coast, 167-68). In 
negotiating trade terms with the king of Dahomey in 1727, Snelgrave expressed his 
preference for a ratio of three men to every woman (New Account, 73). 
9. 8osman, Description. 337. 
10. Manning (Slavery. Colonialism, and Economic Growth, 27-31) says that his 
estimates of slave exports may be considered accurate to within ± 20 percent. 
11. Akinjogbin, Dahomey, 63-64; Law, "Slave-Raiders," 48-49; "Captain 
Phillip's Journal," 219; 80sman, Description, 345. For sale of the king's women in 
Dahomey, see Pommegorge. Description, 166, and Dalzel, History. 146. 
12. Law, "History and Legitimacy," 431-56; Bertho, "Parente," 121-32; Chap­
man, "Human Geography," 79-101; Le Herisse, Royaume, 273. 
13. Norris, Memoirs, xiv; letter of DeJisle, quoted in Law, "Dahomey," 242. It 
is possible that Agaja was referring to independent lineage compounds when he

--- Page 342 ---
Notes to Pages 5/ -55 
325 
used the tenn translated into French and then English as "country." Twentieth­
century descendants of Hangbe, for example, wrote ofber "principality," mean­
ing her large compound near Abomey's center. Lamb reported a similar boast by 
Agaja from the 1724-26 period, but with different numbers of conquests. Lamb 
presumably altered Agaja's claims to fit what be believed to be reality by saying 
that Agaja's grandfather had conquered one kingdom and his father nine. His 
brother fought seventy-nine battles in the process of subduing "several pety king­
doms," and Agaja himself"fought two hundred and nine battles, in which I have 
subdewed many great kings and kingdoms." The ful Lamb text is reproduced in 
Law, "Further Light," 211-26. 
14. Lamb's estimates (see Law, "Further Light") cannot always be trusted. He 
also estimates the distance from Whydah to Abomey at two hundred miles, when 
in fact it is closer to sixty. See Smith, New Voyage, 182-83. Coastal kings also had 
massive households; the wives of the king of Whydah grew in numbers from 
Barbot's estimate of two hundred in 1682 to Phillip's three thousand in 1694 and 
to Bosman's four thousand to five thousand in 1697-99 (Hair, Jones, and Law, 
Barbot. 2:648. fn. 12). 
15. Labat, Voyage, 2:96-97. Bosman's observation is quoted in Smith, New 
Voyage. 206. 
16. Mercier, Civilisations. 289-90; Forbes, Dahomey, 2: 14; interview, Sagbadju 
Glele, 26 March 1972. 
17. Snelgrave, New Account, 135. 
18. The European who recorded the news of warfare in Dahomey was William 
Baillie, who wrote from Whydah, 18 Jan. 1718 (Law, Slave Coast, 267). Law argues 
convincingly that Agaja's succession was circa 1716 rather than 1708, as Norris 
believed (Law, "Ideologies," 339, £n. 4). 
19. Accounts of Hangbe include Coissy, "Regne," 5-8; Le Hl:risse, Royaume, 
7; interviews, Sagbadju Glele, 25 July 1972; Kinhwe, 7 March 1973; elders, house of 
Hangbe,9 June 1972, 20 July 1984; GleJe, "Royaume," 46-47. 
20. Burton, Mission, 4:268; Akinjogbin, Dahomey, 60-62; Law, "History and 
Legitimacy," 442; Law, Slave Coost, 266-67 and 275, rn. 59. Burton's first two edi­
tions of Mission were in two volumes. The 1893 edition, which is used in these 
citations, was part of a larger, multivolume collection of his works. In it, the ma­
terials of vat I of the first edition appear as vol. 3, and vol. 2 becomes vo!. 4. 
21. Interview, elders, house of Hangbe, 9 June 1972. 
22. Interview, Kinhwe, 7 March 1973; Foa, Dahomey, 13. Dunglas collected 
two oral accounts saying that Akaba died of smallpox during the course of a war 
campaign and that Hangbe, who resembled him, took charge of the Dahomean 
army in his place ("Contribution." part 1, 97).

--- Page 343 ---
J16 
Notes to Pages 56-66 
23. Law, "Ideologies," 339, fn. 4-
24. There is ritual evidence of an ambiguous relationship between children of 
princesses and the royal lineage. In 1973, during the two-week-long cycle of annual 
ceremonies performed by the children of Behanzin, descendants of princesses 
stole one of the goats waiting to be sacrificed. Later, the goat was returned and 
money was given to the thieves. The na daho had no explanation except that 
the children of princesses were "precious" to the family. A similar incident of 
ritual mischief was witnessed by Fomes during ceremonies in 1849 (Dahomey, 2: 
130-31). 
25. Atkins, Voyage, 119; Akinjogbin, Dahomey, 77. Those who disagree with 
Akinjogbin include Henige and Johnson, "Agaja," 57-67; Johnson, "Bulfinch 
Lambe," 345-50; Ros. "Anti-Slave Trade," 263-71; Law, "Dahomey," 237-67; 
Law, Slave Coast. 300-308. Nevertheless, Akinjogbin's thesis has proved irresis­
tible to several writers whose goal has been to synthesize West African history. 
Interestingly, Beninese historians have by and large followed the lead of the oral 
sources and have not shown themselves to be overly concerned with the question 
of motivation in the conquest of Alada and Whydah. Much to the consternation 
of foreign visitors. descendants of one of Dahomey's most famous slave traders, 
Francisco Felix de Souza, in 1992 used an eighteenth-century slave-traders' argu­
ment to justify the de SoU2a ancestor's work. suggesting that had slaves not been 
traded to Europeans. they would have been offered as human sacrifices in Abomey 
(C., "Ouidah," 40). 
26. Law provides an excellent description of the taking of Alada and Whydah 
that is based on contemporary European sources (Slave Coast. 278-87). See also 
Akinjogbin, Dahomey, 39-71. 
27. Akinjogbin, Dahomey, 69-72; Law, Slave Coast, 284-85; and Law, "Ne­
glected Account," 323-24. 
28. Gavoy, "Notes," 53-56. See also Dunglas, "Contribution," Part 1, 149-53; 
and Hazoume, "Conquðte," 41-45. 
29. Snelgrave, New Account, 10-12, 13-14. 
30. Norris, Memoirs, 68. 
31. Ibid., 92-93. 
32. Snelgrave describes the "Camp" of the king as being about forty miles in­
land from 'akin and "near a very great ruin'd Town, late the principal place of the 
Kingdom of Ardra" (New Account, 28). Modern Alada grew up around a Daho­
mean palace located slightly more than a mile from Togudo. the old center of the 
kings of Alada. 
33. Law, "Further Light," 218; Snelgrave, New Account. 24 -66. 
34. Sne1grave, New Account, 36-48.

--- Page 344 ---
35. Ibid., 77-78. 
36. Ibid., 39; Smith, New Voyage, 195. 
Notes (0 Pages 66-74 
327 
37. Lamb, in a letter purportedly written in 1726 and delivered in 1731, numbers 
Agaja's palaces at seven, but in a letter written from Abomey in 1724 he claims 
eleven. Law, "Further Light," 217-18; Smith, New Voyage, 183. 
38. Snelgrave, New Account, 34-35, 38-39; Law, "Further Light," 219. 
39. Van Dantzig, Dutch, 94; Edwards. Life, 9. n; Lander, Records, 2:191; Bos­
man, Description. 396; Snelgrave, New Account, 126. 
40. AN, P. K. GJele, "Royaume," 78. 
41. Snelgrave, New Account. 27; Van Dantzig, Dutch, 295; Le Herisse, Royaume, 
38-41; SOM, "Retlexions," 52. See Law (Slave Coast, 84 -85) for a description of 
the office in neighboring kingdoms. 
42. Norris, Memoirs, 4. Though no title is given, a Dutch trader visiting Da­
homey in 1733 was received by two important officers. the migan (Taminga) and 
"the King's First and Supreme Councillor," who may well have been the meu (Van 
Dantzig, Dutch, 295). 
43. Le Herisse, Royaume, 42; Law, Slnve Coost, 325, 335-37. Obkhere has col­
lected a list of the individuals said to have served as gau. It begins with the reign 
ofWegbaja ("Change," 243). 
44. Labat, Voyage, 2: 59-60, 98. 250-51; Law, Slave Corut, 324-28. 
45. Snelgrave, New Account, 98-106. 
46. Dalzel, History, 68. 
47. Le Herisse, Royaume, 133; interview, Abo, ) May 1972; Forbes, Dahomey, 2: 
135; Burton, Mission, 4:270-71. Names are given in the twentieth-century oral 
tradition for kpojito to the kings prior to Agaja. However, names are frequently 
cited for persons who purportedly held offices prior to the known historical cre­
ation of such offices, a practice that helps enshrine the sense of immutability in 
Dahomean institutional structures. 
48. Author's field notes, Hountondji family. Abomey, 1984. Much of this dis­
cussion draws on oral accounts collected by Blier ("Path") in 1985-86 and by 
a team of researchers directed by Albert Tingbe-Azalou ("Mythe et Inceste") in 
1992-93-
49. Law, "History and Legitimacy," 450. 
50. Burton, Mision, 4:111; Blier, "Path." Law argues that it was Wegbaja who 
effectively declared Dahomey's independence from AIlada suzerainty in 1715 and 
that for that reason he is remembered as the first king. He cites a king list pub­
lished by Norris to claim that Wegbaja was in fact the second king of the Daho­
mean dynasty, not the first ("History and Legitimacy," 437-39). 
51. Dunglas's history of Dahomey, which is based in the main on oral tradi-

--- Page 345 ---
328 
Notes to Pages 74-78 
tions, describes a series of disputes between the Alladahonu and the chiefs who 
were ainon, "owners of the land." Al the disputes were resolved by the kiling of 
the chief and the seizure of the land by the Alladahonu ("Contribution," part 1, 
85-87). Fuglestad argues that the Alladahonu never accommodated themselves 
with an earlier religious authority, and thus, by conquering lands without recog­
nizing the appropriate earth gods, the Dahomean dynasty was never seen as le­
gitimate in the eyes of its subjects. Paradoxically. it was at the same time liberated 
to use force alone in the conquest of territory, and hence could enjoy greater 
military success ("Quelques reflexions," 493-517). 
52. Maupoil, "Geomancie," 530 -31, fn. 2; Burton, Mission, 4: 97; Maurice Glele 
indirectly confirms Dakodonu's distance from the royal Uneage by saying that no 
member of the royal family could ever be named agasunon. He also reinforces the 
likelihood that these politico-ritual accommodations were made during the reign 
of Agaja by saying that the agasunon began to live at Wawe (where he still resides) 
during the reign of Agaja (Danxome. 65-67). 
53. Tingbe-Azalou, "Mythe et lnceste," 18-19; Blier, "Path," 403. A different 
account of Adonon's origins that I collected from Da Adonon, the head of the 
descendants of Adonon in Abomey, conflated her identity with that of Aligbonon 
and claimed that she was a sister to Dakodonu (interview, 22 Dec. 1972). Though 
it contradicts the notion that Adonon was wife to Dakodonu, such a tradition 
hints that Dakodonu and his family were not of the Alladahonu lineage. 
54. Adonon in interviews, 13 and 16 Oct. 1972. Weme Jigbe was the home of 
Yahaze, a king that oral tradition claims was defeated by Akaba. Burton heard that 
a war against Weme Jigbe was waged during the reign of Akaba. These accounts 
suggest that the war against Yahaze could have been the one in which Adonon lost 
her son (Mission, 4: 168). Interestingly, Adonon refused to allow her wealth to be 
incorporated into the patrilineage of her birth. A story told through the idiom of 
marital relations describes a break between the kpojito and her own patri-kin. 
Supposedly the family of Adonon sent a daughter to the household of the king to 
serve Adonon. Adonon's husband, Wegbaja, made the young woman pregnant, a 
serious moral violation that normally was considered grounds for divorce. How­
ever, AdonoD's father negotiated an accommodation with Wegbaja. and the sister 
received two villages, many retainers, and a new name, Ajakije, meaning "what 
the brother-in-law did was pleasing to the father." Supposedly because of this 
incident, Adonon ruled that no member of her patri lineage should inherit her 
position, and all subsequent Adonon have been drawn from among the descen­
dants of Akaba or Agaja. Interview, Adonon, Gbonugan Gohonu, and Hangbesi, 
16 Oct. 1972. 
55. Dalzel, History, 176; Burton, Mission, 3: 158; SOM, Rapport lournalier; 
ANB, Rapport adresse; Dunglas. "Contribution," part 1, 16; Herskovits, Dahomey,

--- Page 346 ---
Notes to Pages 79-$5 
329 
2:47. So far as I can discern, Le Herisse was the first to use the term kpojito in 
print (Royaume, 28). 
56. Labat, Voyage, 2:79, 92; Snelgrave, New Account, 151; Rattray, Ashanti, 
81-82. 
57. Mercier, Civilisations, 284; Law, Oyo. 70-71. 
58. Burton, Mission, 3:235; Duncan, Travels, 1:253-54. Skertchly describes a 
ceremony honoring three of the early kings in which the agasunon and King Glele 
appear to have stood near each other. He says notbing about if and how they 
greeted each other (Dahomey. 396). 
Chapter 3 .-.::,> The Age of Tegbesu and HwanJIIe 
1. This discussion is based in part on concepts of African power outlined by 
Arens and Karp in their introduction to Creativity of Power, x-xxix. 
2. Dunglas. "Contribution," part 1. 144-45. 
3. Ibid .• 146-47; interview, Agessi Voyon. 28 April 1972; Yomana, 10 June 1972; 
Fengbe, 14 Oct. 1972. Heviosso is known in Yoruba-speaking areas as Shango; 
Sakpata is Shoponna. 
4. Yomana, 6 June 1972. 
5. Le Herissc, Royaume. 31, 299-300. 
6. Law. Slave Coast, 280-81, 287-88. 290-93. 
7. Dalzel, History, 60; Law, Slave Coast. 325-26; Le Herisse, Royaume, 300-1; 
Norris, Memoirs, 6-10. Norris dates Tegbesu's accession to 1732 and the meu's 
rebellion to 1735. Letters from factors at Whydah, however, place the date of 
Agaja's death in 1740 (see Akinjogbin, Dahomey, 107; Verger, Flux, 171). IfNorris 
was correct about the object of the meu's revolt but wrong about the date, we can 
assume that the meu's rebellion took place in the early 1740S. 
8. Law, Slave Coast, 319-20; AN, P. K. GleIc, "Dan-h6-min," 49. 
9. Dalzel. History, 7; M'Leod, Voyage, 39; Le Herisse, Royaume, 7. Describing 
Whydah, both Bosman and Marchais report that the elder son was selected unless 
there were good reasons to put him aside (Bosman, Description, 366-366a; Labat, 
Voyage, 2:50). Later authors who claim that the firstborn was the usual heir in­
clude Forbes. Dahomey, 1:27; Le Herisse, Royaume, 7; Quenum,Pays, I]; AN, P. K. 
GJele, "Dan-hb-min," 46. 
10. Another term, less commonly used, was degenon or degenon daho. Its ety­
mology is unclear. Degenon means old man in contemporary Fongbe usage. The 
term reportedly was used among ministers at court and may have been a more 
familiar appellation. See SeguroJa, Dictionnaire, 1: 116; interview, Aho, 21 Jan. 1972. 
11. SOM, "Reflexions sur Juda par les Sieurs de Chenevert et Abbe Bulet," 72. 
Norris states that the heir apparent ofTegbesu was given a patrimony called Pavey 
(Memoirs. 2). Accounts from Whydah in the eighteenth century and Porto Novo

--- Page 347 ---
330 
Notes to Pages 86-92 
in the nineteenth also claim that the king's sons were kept far from the court 
(Labat, Voyage. 2: 52> "Dahomey," 18). 
12. The five kings who ruled for more than twenty years were Agaja, Tegbesu, 
Adandozan, Gezo, and Glele (see table 1. p. 49). Le Herisse (Royaume, 8) says the 
heir was the first son born after the king was named heir. Norris (Memoirs. 4) says 
the heir was the first son born after the king was enthroned, as does Quenum 
(Pays, 17). Marchais reports that in Whydab it was tbe first son born after coro· 
nation (Labat, Voyage. 2:51). 
13. SOM, "Re£lexions," 6; Le Herisse, Royaume. 8. 
14. Noms, Memoirs, 4> 85. Dunglas ("Contribution," part I, 165-66) names 
the "Council of Ministers." However, he may be projecting backwards from his 
knowledge of the late nineteenth century, when a "Council of Ministers" was 
central to many decisions at court. including the choice ofBehanrin as heir. 
15. SOM. "Re£lexions," 72-73; see also Pommegorge, Description, 188. 
16. Bosman, Description, 366a; Dalze.l. History, 22; Norris, Memoirs, 130; 
Dunglas, "Contribution," part 3, 20. 
17. Pommegorge, Description, 188. For Dahomey, se SOM, "Retlexions," 72; 
for Whydah, se labat, Voyage, 2: 52; for Porto Novo, see "Dahomey," 18. 
18. Pires, Viagem. 78. Pommegorge, Description, 188. A similar scene appears 
in Norris, Memoirs, 105, involving the heir apparent. 
19. Bay, "Royal Women," 208-9. 
20. Law has traced changes in accounts about Tegbesu from a contemporary 
view that he was a usurper to a twentieth·century version that claims he was the 
designated heir. See "History and Legitimacy," 441- 42. 
21. Interview. Sagbadju Glele. 25 July 1972; Verger, Notes. 450; Herskovits, 
Dahomey, 2:104j Maupoil, "Geomancie," 47. fn. 1. 
22. Maupoil, "Geomancie," 70. 
23. Maupoil. "Geomancie," 64j Herskovits and Herskovits, Outline. 35; Hers· 
kovits, Dahomey, 2: 104. 
24. Herskovits records an oral tradition that claims the foUowing as vodun 
imported by Hwanjile: Mawu, Usa. Sakpata, Heviosso, Gu, Dan Aidowhedo, 
Nesuhwe, Tovodun, Fa, Menona, Boko·Legba (Dahomey, 2:104). le Herisse 
credits to Hwanjile or Tegbesu the following: Mawu, Lisa. Heviosso. H'lan, and 
the tohosu (Royaume, 102, 112-13, 121-22). Most other sources list only Mawu, 
Lisa, and the hunter deity Age. These three latter vodun remain under the direc· 
tion of Hwanjile in a sanctuary located adjacent to the palace of Akaba and facing 
the central palace of the kings. It is clear that both Mawu and I isa were known in 
Dahomey before their elevation by Hwanjile. The distinction being claimed may 
be the specific shrines brought from Aja or the joining of the two as chief deities.

--- Page 348 ---
Nores to Pages 93-/06 
331 
25. SOM, "Retlexions," 75. The priests of the snake deity of Whydah by the 
late eighteenth century reportedly received 20,000 cowries (about £2.5 sterling) 
every six months and had been given four female slaves to work their fields. At 
anual ceremonies for the vodun. the monarchy would provide a sacrificial cow, 
brandy, and 20,000 cowries (Laharthe, Voyage, 131-32). 
26. Herskovits, Dahomey, 1: 229-33. 
27. Maupoil. "Geomancie," 46-47. 
28. Herskovits and Herskovits, Outline, 35, 36; Maupoil, "Geomancie," 48; 
Le Herisse, Royaume, 303. 
29. Yai, "Vodun to Mawu," 10-29; Verger, Notes, 438, 504-6; Herskovits and 
Herskovits, Outline, It, 14. Glele, Danxome, 100. See also Palau Marti. roi-dieu. 215. 
and Mercier, Civilisations, 284. 
30. Law, Slave Coast, 327-28; Akinjogbin. Dahomey, 120; Norris, Memoirs, 50. 
31. Le Herisse, Royaume, 33. 
32. Norris. Memoirs. 9-10, 85-86. 
33. Le Herisse, Royaume, 37; interview, Nondichao, 7 September 1994· 
34. Norris, Memoirs, 85-86, 98; SOM, "RefIexions," 7. 52; Pires, Viagem, 51. 
Norris confuses the duties of the ajaho with those of the sagan. 
35. Interview. Agbado, 17 June 1972. 
36. Chenevert and Bulet appear to be referring to this legal status when they 
claim that "al the boys and girls born of ministers and officers are placed in the 
hands of the King who disposes of them as he pleases" (SOM, "Retlexions," 7). 
37. Interview, Fengbe, 14 Oct 1972. 
38. Le Herisse, Royaume, 39-41. 
39. Ibid., 51; Law, "Slave-Raiders." 50-51; Snelgrave, New Account, 37; SOM, 
"Retlexions," u; Law, "Royal Monopoly." 565. 
40. Pommegorge. Description. 208-9; Da12el. History, 208-10; SOM, "Reflex-
. 
,. 
IOns, 20. 
41. Manning, Slavery, Colonialism. and Economic Growth, 43; Law. "Royal 
Monopoly," 567. See also law, Slave Coast, 212-13 for a comparison with Allada 
and Whydah. 
42. Dalzel, History, "Introduction," x. See discussion of the question of pur­
chases of captives in Law, "Royal Monopoly." Law in the end comes to believe 
that al war captives were monopolized by the king ("Slave-Raiders," 49). Le 
Hrisse states unequivocally that only the king "had the right to possess war 
slaves." However. his description. which is drawn on evidence from the late nine­
teenth century, implies that the captives that he discusses are those taken by sol­
diers dependent upon the king (Royaume, 52). 
43. law, "Royal Monopoly," 562; Duncan, Travels. 2: 264-

--- Page 349 ---
332 
Notes to Pages 107-1 14 
44. Snelgrave. New Account. 37-38; Law. Slave Coast, 174-75. Burton similarly 
witnessed the giving of relatively small sums to soldiers of the king (Burton, Mis­
sion, 4: 149-50). Le Hl:risse reports that soldiers were given the equivalent of five 
francs and a wrapper (approximately two yards of cloth); this was when slaves 
fetched 160 to 320 francs, probably in the late nineteenth century (Royaume. 90). 
45. Dalzel, introduction to History, xi. Since the king paid his accounts with 
these shortened strings, both he and the women who strung the cowries benefited. 
46. Le Hhisse appears to be speaking solely of warriors of the king when he 
describes the system. He calls the amount given by the king "in no sense a pay­
ment but a simple gift capable of inspiring courage" (Royaume, 52). 
47. Agbo. Histoire, 44-45. Agbo consistendy refers to the period of time be­
tween the conquest of Whydah by Dahomey and the conquest of Dahomey by 
France as the period of Dahomean "domination" or "occupation." 
48. Snelgrave, New Account, 66 (a misprint; the page in fact is 82)-88. 
49. Norris, Memoirs, 40-48. See also Law's discussion of the relative verac­
ity of the Norris account in "Slave Trader," 229-30. Law, "Royal Monopoly," 
563-64. 
SO. SOM, "Reflexions." 53; Verger, Notes. 240, 525-31. 
51. Law, "Further Light," 218-19; Pommegorge, Description, 159-60. The ques­
tion of whether or not the Dahomean kings were considered to be divine in the 
same sense as their Yoruba-speaking counterparts became a point of scholarly 
controversy in the twentieth century. See Palau Marti, roi-dieu. 
52. Norris, Memoirs, 108. A twentieth-century oral historian in Abomey, Vin­
cent Kinhwe, similarly claimed that certain of the class of palace women called the 
kposi wore veils of beads (interview, 24 March 1972). 
53. Begining with Tegbesu, traditions assert, the kings of Dahomey refused to 
continue to re<:eive the sacred scarification marks that were visible signs of the 
leopard Agasu because, once marked by Agasu, no one could thereafter look them 
in tbe face. The person designated to receive the scars instead was the ajahutonon, 
the priest of the vodun-founder of the royal line of Allada (Le Herisse, Royaume. 
10-11). In fact, except for moments when they consumed food or drink, the kings 
of Dahomey were never recorded as having concealed their faces. 
54. Johnson, History, 57-63; Law, Oyo, 68; Norris, Memoirs, 94; Pires, Viagem, 
51, 59, 60. The functions of the legede were similar to those of another Oyo insti­
tution, that of the ajeie, palace slaves of the alafin who resided in provincial towns 
to watch over the loyalty of subordinate rulers. See Law, Oyo. 110-13. 
55. Pommegorge, Description, 172. 
56. Johnson, History, 60-61; Law. Oyo, 68-69. 
57. Pommegorge, Description, 168; Akinjogbin. Dahomey, n8. fn. 2; Burton, 
MissUJn, 4:25·

--- Page 350 ---
Notes to Pages 1 / 5-/27 
333 
ss. Johnson, History, 62; Agbado, 17 June 1972. 
59. Ibid., 57; Law, 0ro, 69, 186. 
60. SOM, "Retlexions," 53; Norris, Memoirs, 100. 
61. Norris. Memoirs, 86. Norris appears to confuse the ajaho's duties with those 
of the sogan. He says that the jahou "is master of the horse." Dalzel, History, 163; 
Pires, Viagem, 100; Le Herisst, Royaume, 43, 52; Mercier and Lombard, Guide, 
13-14· 
62. Dalzel, History, 158-64. 
63. Dalzel, History, xx, 224; Norris, Memoirs, 16, 8), 92; Dunglas, "Contribu­
tion," part 1, 168. 
64. Nardin, "reprise," 93; Blanchely, "Dahomey," 534-37i Brue, "Voyage," 59· 
Chapter .., __ The Struggle to Maintain the State 
l. SOM, "Reflexions," 3; Gayibor, "Memoire," 52. 
2. Akinjogbin provides a useful political and economic overview of this period 
in Dahomey, 141-201. 
3. Pommegorge, Description, 204; Law, Slnve Coast, 92-93; Norris, Memoirs, 87, 
99. See also Dalzel, introduction to History, xi. 
4. Pommegorge, Description. 164-65; SOM. "Reflexions," 7; DaJzel, introduc­
tion to History, xii; 170 -;no 
5. Akin;ogbin, Dahomey, 1)4. Seventeenth and early eighteenth-century de­
scriptions of the organization of trade in Allada and Whydah are comparable to 
nineteenth-century descriptions of the trade in Dahomey. It seems reasonable 
to assume. then. that the organization of the trade in late eighteenth-century Da­
homey was similar. See Law, Slave Coast, 109-11, for Allada and Whydah, and see 
Law. "Royal," 560-61, for Dahomey. 
6. Cruickshank. "Report." Manning takes issue with Cruickshank's estimate. 
which in fact had been given him by the slave dealer Francisco Felix de Souza. He 
argues that the king's gross revenue was only $40,000 (Slavery. Colonialism, and 
Economic Growth, 4B and fn. 78). Manning, however. compares Cruickshank's 
estimate of total revenues derived from the trade (including customs duties and 
fees, plus proceeds from the sale of the king's slaves) to his own calculation of only 
the revenues from the sale of the king's slaves. Moreover, Manning uses a lower 
per-slave price and a lower number of slaves exported than does Cruickshank. 
Cruickshank errs in assuming that the king paid a customs duty of $5 on each of 
the three thousand slaves that he sold. Thus his $300.000 estimate should be re­
duced by $15,000. 
7. Norris, Memoirs, 87; Dalzei, introduction to History, xx-xxi. 
8. Adande, Recades, 13; SkertchJy. Dahomey, 454-55. 
9. Pommegorge, Description. 189; Norris. Memoirs, 112.

--- Page 351 ---
334 
Notes to Pages 128-136 
10. Skertchly, Dahomey, 216-17. See also Duncan, Travels, 1:264, and Burton, 
Mission, 3: 252. Ironicaly, when the French conquered Abomey and entered the 
palace in late 1892, they reported that they had found "a good deal of cloth" but 
little else (d'A1beca, "Dahomey," [August 18, 18941, ll2). 
11. Norris, Memoirs, 93-94; Forbes, Dahomey, 2: 213-42. 
12. Nords, Memoirs, 71, 146; SOM, "Reflexions," 46, 48. 
13. Verger, Flux, 165; Smith. New Voyage. 173. 
14. Law, Slave Coast, 269, and "African Response," 283; Atgyle, Fon, 81-89; and 
Reid. "Aristocrats." 
15. Hawume, Pacte. 19-26; Le Herisse, Royaume, 64; Herskovits. Dahomey, 2: 
91-92. Se also Pires (Viagem, 87-88) for an account of a turncoat priest who 
offered the supernatural secrets of Oyo military strength to the Dahomean king. 
16. Norris, Memoirs, 54; Dalzel, History, 182-88. In the interim. the Dahomean 
army was nearly routed in a surprise attack. 
17. Snelgrave.New Account, 56-58. The story ofNa Geze (chapter 2) is another 
example of the genre. Dalzel, History. 167-68. 
18. Dalzel, History. 201-2. See also Dunglas, "Contribution," part 1, 150 and 
168-69. 
19. Pommegorge, Description. 164-65; Norris, Memoirs, 37, 56; Dalze1, History, 
163-64, 185-88; Akinjogbin, Dahomey. 116. 
20. Pommegorge, Description, 162, 181; Snelgrave. New Account, 77-78; Dalzel, 
introduction to History, xi. 
21. Evidence for gender roles in this period can be frustrating at best. Barbot 
writes that "the men and women of luda {WhydahJ are generally large. industri­
ous and strong . . . .  They make their principal occupation going to war whenever 
they have an opportunity. In time of peace they cultivate their lands in such a way 
that you see none empty or unoccupied." (Hair, Jones, and Law, Barbot. 2:641). 
Does Barbot mean what he seems to say-that both sexes both made war and 
farmed? No other contemporary writer says that women were included in the 
army of Whydah. Moreover, other contemporary visitors name only women as 
farmers. Could Barbot have meant that men warred and women farmed? Or 
should we take him literally, at his word? The Dutch visitor Olfert Dapper in the 
seventeenth century similarly implies that women and men fought when he says 
"in time of war nobody is exempt. except old people and small children" (quoted 
in Law, Slave Coast, 99). 
22. Law, "Further Light," 217. See Law, Slave Coast, 58-63. for a discussion of 
the demography of the area in the sixteenth to nineteenth centuries. Unfortu­
nately, apart from numerous seventeenth- and early eighteenth-century accounts 
claiming that the area was densely populated. we have no knowledge of the tot31

--- Page 352 ---
Notes to Pages 136-142 
335 
population of Whydah and no even reasonably accurate means to estimate it. 
Manning has argued that the Slave Coast was severely depopulated as a result of 
the slave trade. He charts his data on a graph that appears to indicate some half a 
million fewer persons in the Bight of Benin (roughly the same area as the Slave 
Coast) in 1850 as compared with 1730. Nevertheless, when we compare mid­
nineteenth-century estimates that give the total population of Dahomey at two 
hundred thousand to Lamb's claim of an army of five hundred thousand in the 
1720S, we get a sense of Lamb's exaggeration of numbers of soldiers (Manning, 
Slavery and African Life, 67). 
23. Norris, Memoirs, 12-13, 21, 38-39, 75; Dalzel, History, 10; Labat, Voyage, 
2:237· 
24. Sne1grave, New Account, 126. 
25. D'Almeida-Topor,Amazones, 33-36; Law, "Amazons," 245-60. Apparently 
written for a popular audience, d'A1meida-Topor's book is of limited value as a 
historical work because of its inaccurate citations and uncritical use of written and 
oral traditions on a subject that is particularly susceptible to mythmaking. 
26. Dalzel. History. 176. Dunglas identifies Agoonab as the area near the con­
fluence of the east and west Coufo Rivers. about thirty-one miles northwest of 
Abomey ("Contribution," part 2, 15). However, Dalze1 later says that Kpengla 
died at Agoonah following the defeat of Ketu (History, 204). Since Ketu is east­
northeast of Abomey, Agoonah may in fact be the area called Agonli or Agoni, 
which lies east of Abomey between the Zou and Weme Rivers. Historical patterns 
repeated themselves in 1977, when a band of mercenaries landed at Cotonou's 
airport to attempt a coup d'etat. In the aftermath, President Mathieu Kerekou 
called out the entire civilian population-male and female-to bring whatever 
arms they had and defend the nation. 
27. Dalzel, introduction to History, xi; Pommegorge, Description, 162; Forbes, 
Dahomey, 2:88; OegbeJo, "Amazones"; interview, Yomana, 10 June 1972. 
28. Le Herisse, Royaume, 52; SOM, "Retlexions," 52. 
29. Norris, Memoirs, 13; Dalzel, History, 163. 
30. Pommegorge, Description, 223-35. Norris records an English version of the 
same incident (Memoirs, 56-59). 
31. Berbain, Comptoir, 65; SOM, "RHlexions," 53. Antonio Vaz Coeiho, a free 
black born in Brazil, offered European technologies and skils and fought with the 
AIlada troops against the Dahomeans. Marchais comments that African smiths 
were skilled at repairing guns and that the Africans shot well (Labat, Voyage, 2: 
242-43). 
32. Labat, Voyage, 2: 237-39; SOM, "Refiexions." 76. Smith simil arly describes 
warfare on the Gold Coast (Voyage. 217-18).

--- Page 353 ---
336 
Notes to Pages J42-151 
33. Smith, Voyage, 182; Norris, Memoirs, 12-15. Norris says the Oyo war in 
question began in 1738; Law and Akinjogbin prove that the date was in fact later. 
See Law, "Slave Trader," 226-27. 
34. Snelgrave, New Account, 56-58. 
35. Smith, New Voyage, 183; Norris, Memoirs, 99. 
36. Though ideally marriages were made only to serve the interests of lineages 
and not individuals, the choices and opinions of both the female and male part­
ners were normally taken into account and played an important role. See, for 
example, for this period Labarthe, Voyage, t28. 
37. Labat, Voyage. 2:80. 
38. Europeans made much of a handful of ahosi who had been born of mar­
riages between European traders and African women at the coast and whom they 
pitied at being incorporated into the palace. Sally Abson, the daughter of the En­
glish factor Lionel Abson, is the most famous of these. See M'Leod, Voyage, 79-
86, 1.24; Pires, Viagem, 93. 
39. Manning. Slavery and African Life, 67-68; Le Herisse, Royaume, 291. 
40. Reade, Savage Africn, 53. 
41. Norris, Memoirs, 86; Snelgrave, New Account, 78. 
42. Herskovits, Dahomey, 2:72-79. Herskovits's account ofthe census is con­
troversial and was specificaUy denied by Dahomeans in the 19305 when Maupoil 
tried to corroborate it. The method of reckoning that Herskovits describes, how­
ever, was witnessed by Norris in the 1770S (Memoirs, 91). 
43. Interview. Kinhwe, 1 February 1973. See also Maupoil, "Geomancie," 460, 
fn. 2. 
44. Norris, Memoirs, 99. Law has argued that marriage was more polygynous 
along the Slave Coast than elsewhere in West Africa; i.e., that powerful individuals 
took more women as wives than in neighboring areas (Sfnve Coast, 65). 
45. 8osman, New and Accurate, 214-15; Norris, Memoirs, 98-99; Law, Slave 
Coast, 54-55. Finding relative stability in the price of chickens from 1750 to 1850, 
Law remarks that the price of prostitutes rose "precipitously" over those years. 
46. Norris, Memoirs, 88. KpengJa tried to fix the price of women slaves at 
an artificaUy low twenty-six heads of cowries (Dalzel, History, 213). At mid­
nineteenth century, another visitor reported that the cost for a palace woman was 
30,000 cowries (Guillevin, "Voyage," 292-93). 
47. Pires, Viagem, 67. 
48. Labat, Voyage, 2:79. 
49. Pires, Viagem, 84. 
SO. Norris, Memoirs, 108, 130; SOM, "Reflexions," 6. Six does not appear to 
have been a sacred or symbolic number in Fon culture, which tends to support

--- Page 354 ---
Notes to Pages 1 5 1-159 
337 
the possibility that there were in fact six. wives of Tegbesu recognized as mothers 
of potential heirs. That particular number is not used in conjunction with any 
other king. 
51. Pires, Viagem, 59. 
52. Dalzel, History, 161-62, 224; Pires, Viagem,84. 
53. Norris, Memoirs, 18-19; DaJzel, History, 165-66, 211; Le Herisse, Royaume, 
303-4. In the case of the Mahi and Kpengla, Dalze!'s own account of the final 
defeat of Mahi by Dahomey makes it likely that the Mahi sought peace and as­
sisted Dahomey because they had become a subordinate state. 
54. Pires, Viagem, 52, 84, 98; SOM, "Retlexions," 73. 
55. Norris, Memoirs, 127-28. Of Tegbesu's successors, two (Agonglo and 
Kpengla) appear to have died prematurely, and Adandozan was removed from 
power, living for another forty or fifty years. 
56. Ibid., ऄ SOM. "Reflexions," 72-73; GJele, Danxome, 106; Dalzel, History, 
203; Pires, Viagem, 68-70. 
57. Pires, Viagem, 70; Moulero, "Guao," 51-59; Hazoume. Pacte. 1l0-12. The 
Herskovitses claim that four kings died of smallpox; however, they do not list the 
names and I have been unable to find associations with smallpox for any kings 
other than Kpengla, Agonglo. and Gezo (Herskovits and Herskovits, Outline, 18). 
Agaja, Gezo, and Glele were reportedly pockmarked. Both Moulero and Hazoume 
claim that the death of Gezo was kept secret for a period of time, with Hazoume 
insisting that the king's death was not announced until the third dry season after­
wards. or three years later. during an epidemic of smallpox. Hazoume is contra­
dicted by European sources, who note that the Grand Customs in honor of Gezo 
were held in July and August 1860. 
58. Herskovits and Herskovits. Outline. 16-18; Herskovits, Dahomey, 2: 131-34. 
59. Herskovits, Dahomey, 2: 137. 
60. Ibid., 2:144; Verger, Notes. 253. 
61. Le Herisse, Royaume, 128-29; Verger, Notes, 240-41. In contrast, Le 
Herisse says that Sakpata was proscribed during the nineteenth-century reigns of 
Gem and Glele (Royaume, 128). 
62. Buckley. "God," 187-200; 80sman. New and Accurate. 366a; Labat, Voyage. 
2: 90-91. See aJso Smith, Voyage. 206, and Norris, Memoirs. 5. The only suggestion 
of comparable mayhem in Dahomey is made by Dalzel in his description of the 
death of Kpengla in 1789 (History, 203-4). 
63. Pires, Viagem, 73-75; Le Herisse. Royaume. 179. Dalzel's description of 
mourning for Kpengla in 1789, which was probably inOuenced by descriptions 
ofWhydah, says rather illogically. "No provisions were exposed to sale during the 
space of several days after [Agonglo's 1 accession, which afforded a pretext for the

--- Page 355 ---
338 
Notes to Pages 160-1 7 1 
commission of many disorders; but the interference of the tamegan ImiganJ soon 
put an end to al confusion" (Dalzel, History, 223). The idea of disorder in the 
sense of robberies, pillages, and the setling of scores is also strongly disputed by 
Gieie in Danxome, 108. 
64. Letter ofGuestard cited in Akinjogbin, Dahomey, 153-54; Norris, Memoirs, 
23-24, 105; interview. Agbado, 23 June 1972; Dunglas, "Contribution," part 2, 3-4. 
65. See, for example, Akinjogbin, Dahomey, 153-54. 
66. Norris, Memoirs, 128-29. Dunglas records an oral tradition describing 
a fight within the palace "shortly after" his enthronement ("Contribution," 
part 2, 6-7). 
67. Dalzel, History, 204-5, 222-23. 
68. Pires, Viagem, 70-71; Verger, Flux, 249, fn. 72. Edouard d' Almeida adds that 
others involved in the plot were the agasunon, the ajaho, the meu, and the migan 
("Dahomey," 2: 355). If d'Almeida's account is accurate, the involvement of the 
migan and roeu would seem to contradict Pires's testimony. 
69. Pires, Vingem, 77-80, 85. See also Verger, Flux, 2)0-)1 and 249, fn. 72. 
70. Labarthe, Voyage, 124; Labat, Voyage, 2:92-93; Hair, Jones, and Law, Bar­
bot. 2:641; SOM, "Retlexions," 7J. Pires similarly notes that among those who 
were sent to accompany Agonglo were women singers and dancers (Viagem, 74). 
71. Ellis, Ewe-Speaking Peoples, 127; Skertchly, Dahomey, 446; MAE, Lartique; 
Le Herisse, Royaume, 180. 
72. Pires, Vingem. 76; Le Herisse, Royaume, 16-17. Though Europeans were 
sometimes present at Grand Customs, no one appears to have left a detailed eye­
witness account prior to the Grand Customs in honor of Gezo that were per­
formed in 1860. 
Chapter 5 ...",. The Implications of Cultural and Commercial Change 
1. Pires, Viagem, 70; Verger, Flux, 251-58. Additional missions were sent to 
Lisbon in 1804 and 1811 under the reign of Adandozan. 
2. SOM, "Retlexions," 10. 
3. Adoukonou, ,alons, 95; interview. d'Oliveira, 22 March 1972; Pires, Viagem, 
93-94. During the reign of Gezo, Frandsca Olivier de Montaguere, grand­
daughter of Sophie, was sent to the palace of Abomey to maintain the shrine to 
the god of Christianity. 
4. Several accounts give 1788 as the date of de Souza's arrival in Whydah (e.g.. 
Turner. "Bresiliens," 88-89; de Souza, "Contribution," 17; Hazoum̟, Pacte, 28, 
fn. 1). Verger claims a date afl803 (Flux, 240), which seems more likely. Hazoume, 
for example, appears to confuse Franciso Felix with his brother Jacinto Jose 
de Souza, who was named governor of the Portuguese fort in 1804. 
5. Turner, "Bresiliens," 88-100; de Souza, "Contribution."

--- Page 356 ---
Notes to Pages / 72-/BO 
339 
6. Interview, d'Oliveira, 22 March 1972; d'Oliveira, Visite; Hazoume, Pacte, 
29-30. 
7. Hazoume, Pade, 28; Aguessy, "Mode," 24; GJeIe, Danxome, 117, L22; Dun­
glas, "Contribution," part 2, 44-48; interview, Dosso-Yovo, 9 Nov. 1972. 
8. GleJe, Danxome, 116-18. See also Djivo, Guezo, 21. Akinjogbin uses the image 
of the perforated pot to argue that it was used metaphorically by the Alladahonu 
founders of Dahomey to describe a wholly new conception of the relationship of 
individuals to the state. Rather than a conception of the state as a family, with the 
king as father, the pot represented a state in which each subject was required to 
fill the holes in order to keep the water, which symbolized the king, in place. 
Akinjogbin acknowledges that the metaphor of the pot dates only to the reign of 
Gezo, though he without hesitation applies it to a setting nearly two hundred years 
before (Dahomey, 25, esp. fn. 1). A perforated pot clearly was a popular metaphor 
in the late nineteenth century. Skertchly saw one being paraded in 1871. It was said 
to be a magical pot representing the army of Dahomey ready to attack Abeokuta, 
because water poured into it would not flow out the holes (Skertchly, Dahomey. 
254). A perforated pot was also pictured in a bas-relief in Glele's portion of the 
central palace in Abomey. It was photographed in 1911 and published in Waterlot, 
&s-Reliefs, plate XVI -A. 
9. Dunglas, "Contribution," part 2, 43-44. 
10. Ibid .• 40-47. 
11. Glele, Danxome, 115 -26; Hazoume. Doguicimi, 78-79; MMS, Freeman 
typescript, 172; Maupoil , "Geomancie," 134; Dunglas, "Contribution," part 2, 48. 
A later French visitor, Repin, claimed that Gezo was "brought to power by women 
soldiers who revolted against his own brother" (Tour, 99). Since this is the only 
account to suggest support of Gezo by armed women, and a number of other 
independent accounts suggest otherwise. I suspect that Repin misunderstood in­
formation he was given about Gezo. 
12. GWe, Danxome, 126. 
13. Le Herisse, Royaume, 33; Glele. Danxome, 156; Forbes, Dahomey, 2: 243, 247. 
14. Verger, "Culte," 21. 
15. Dalzel, History, 223; Hazoume, Pacte, 31-32; Glele, Danxome, 109. See also 
Herskovits, Dahomey, 2:64. Those arguing that Agontime did return include 
Sagbadju Glele, interview, 29 July 1972; Kinhwe, interview, 25 March 1972; Aho, 
interview, 23 May 1972; Dunglas. "Contribution," part 2, 63-64; and Verger, 
"Cuite," 21. Herskovits (Dahomey, 2:64) records the tradition, claiming that 
Agontime spent twenty-four years in the Western Hemisphere and then adds 
a contradictor'}' comment that she returned about eighteen years before Gem's 
death, or in about 1840. 
16. Verger, "Culte," 19-24 Verger's work was inspiration for a novel about

--- Page 357 ---
340 
Notes to Pages 180- 1 95 
Agontime by Gleason (Agorime). Both Aho (interview, 23 May 1972) and Elder 
Dosso-Yovo (interview, 9 Nov. 1972) also claimed that Agontime was taken to the 
Brazilian province of Maranhao, but they may have received their information 
from Verger's work. Dosso-Yovo testified with certainty that Agontime had arrived 
in Whydah in 1815, because, he said, the ship bringing her back to Dahomey had 
passed that carrying Napoleon to St. Helena. 
17. Interview, elders, house of Na Agontime, 8 Sept. 1994; interview, Solde and 
Agonhun, 8 Sept. 1994. 
18. Like the oral traditions, this tradition dates the voyages associated with 
Agontime to early in Gew's reign. Don Joao VI became king in IS16 and returned 
his court to Portugual in early 1821. 
19. Verger, "Cuite," 20-21; interview, Dosso-Yovo, 9 Nov. 1972. 
20. Verger, "Echanges," 747-48. Contemporary Abomeans afirm that the 
Yemadje family's founder also was brought as an ahosi from Tendji, but they were 
uncertain if he was of the same lineage. 
21. Forbes, Dahomey, 2:24-27. 
22. Herskovits, Dahomey, 1 :21; Le Herisse, Royaume, 318. These sentiments arc 
echoed in the songs of the official court historians, the kpanligan, who cal Gezo 
the second founder of the kingdom because Gezo freed Dahomey from Oyo (in­
terview, Nondichao, 8 Sept. 1994). 
23. Robertson, Notes, 268. Law provides an excellent account of the freeing of 
Dahomey from Oyo in Oyo, 267-73-
24. Forbes, Dahomey, 1:31 and 68. 
25. Le Herisse, Royaume, 52; d'Albeca, "Dahomey," (18 Aug. 1894). 
26. Interviews, Akati. 30 July 1984, and Badi;i, 3 Oct. 1984; Dunglas, "Premiere 
attaque," IS. 
27. Interview, Dosso-Yovo, 9 Nov. 1972. 
28. Ibid. See also Skertchly, Dahomey, 455. P. K. Glele classmes glesi among the 
ranks of the slaves. calling them kannunmonvi (literally slave child or child of a 
slave) (AN, "Dan-h6-min," 85). 
29. McCoskry to Campbell, as cited in Reid, "Aristocrats," 420. 
30. Manning, Slavery, Colonialism, and Economic Growth. 51-53. Reid ("Aristo­
crats") has produced a detailed study, archivally based. of the politics of the tran­
sition from the slave trade to the palm-oil trade in Dahomey. Many of the points 
made in this brief discussion are elaborated in his work. 
3l. Reid, "Aristocrats," 422-24. Se reviews of the literature in Law, "Royal 
Monopoly." 
32. Manning, Slavery, Colonialism, and Economic Growth. 99; Reid, "Aristo­
crats," 348-50.

--- Page 358 ---
Notes to Pages J 96-20 J 
34 J 
33. Law, "Royal Monopoly," 555-n; Reid, "Aristocrats"; Coquery-Vidrovitch 
has argued that the oil trade was effectively complementary to the slave trade 
("Traite," 107-23), a position persuasively argued by Soumonni in "Compati­
bility," 78-92. Domingos Jose Martins, biggest trader along the coast in the late 
1840S, claimed the t\\'O trades were complementary: he had made $80,000 in the 
previous year from oil alone, but he wasn't sure whether oil or slaves were more 
profitable (Forbes, Dahomey, 2: 85). 
34. Law provides evidence from Abeokuta of the contempt men had for the 
work of preparing and marketing palm oil. He also describes a visitor to Whydah 
in the 1840S who saw a team of men tramping oil out of palm fruit and directed 
by "a kind of overseer," which suggests supervised slave labor ("Trade and Gen­
der," 199, 20;). 
35. Manning, Slavery, Colonialism, and Economic Growth, 99. See also 
Skertchly, Dahomey, 33-34. 
36. Herskovits. Dahomey, 1:30. Abomey is sometimes cited as an exception 
to the gender division of labor in agriculture, on the basis of a mid-nineteenth­
century comment by Forbes that "in the neigbourhood of Abomey, unlike the 
rest of Africa, men labour in the fields and the women are only employed in 
carrying water" (fk1homey. 1: 31). As Law observes. the visibility of women as water 
carriers around Abomey could have been related to the need for large quantities 
of water for processing palm oil ("Trade and Gender," 202). On the other hand. 
the lack of corroborating evidence that women were exempted from other labor in 
order to carry water, as Forbes implies and Law accepts, is difficult to accept, 
particularly in light of Burton's strong assertion in the early 1860s that women 
hoed, sowed, and reaped (Mission, 4: 166, 168). See also Skertchly (Dahomey, 82) 
for evidence that women worked with hoes in rural areas of the kingdom. 
37. Manning. Slavery. Colonialism, and Economic Growth, 49; Law, "Trade and 
Gender." 205-6. 
38. Smith, New Voyage, 183; Dalzel. History. 129; M'Leod, Voyage, 38; Forbes. 
Dahomey, 1:14 and 2: 190; SOM. Rapport de route; Le Herisse, Royaume. 27. 
39. Pommegorge. Description, 165; Skertchly, Dahomey, 454-55; interview, 
elders, Soude famil y, 4 June 1972; Burton, Mission, 4: 45; Le Herisse, Royaume, 78; 
interview, Ad;anahudegbo, 18 Oct. 1972. See also Hazoume's fictionalized account 
of recruitment in Doguicimi, 131. 
40. Forbes. Dahomey, 1 :  152; Skertchly, Dahomey, 417, 444. 
41. MMS, Freeman typescript. 322; Duncan, Travels, 1: 240. European visitors 
of the mid-nineteenth century consistently called the women soldiers "ama­
zons." Some appeared to be likening the Dahomean soldiers to the female war­
riors of Greek mythology; others used the term in a pejorative sense, implicitly

--- Page 359 ---
342 
Notes to Pages 201 -207 
contrasting Dahomean women with a Victorian ideal of ladylike behavior. The 
appellation has continued to be used by twentieth-century scholars; it is rejected 
in this work, save for its occasional use in quotations, because it unnecessarily 
emphasizes the exotic and reinforces misleading and negative images. 
42. Duncan, Travels, I: 22.6. 
43. Forbes, Dahomey, I: 78; Burton, Mission, 4: 145. 
44. Commodore Wilmot to Rear Admiral Sir B. Walker, 29 Jan. 1863, in Bur­
ton, Mission, 4: 237; Button, 3:182; Duncan. Travels, l:226; Repin. Etudes, 91-92, 
9Ġ Burton, "Present State," 407; Skertchly. Dahomey. 384. 
45. Burton, Mission. 3:178; Repin, Tour, 92; Burton. "Present State," 407; 
Skertchly. Dahomey, 457. 
46. Le Herisse, Royaume, 67; Law. Slave Comt, 192, 222-23; Forbes, Dahomey, 
I: 157-59; Skertchly, Dahomey, 502. 
47. D'A1meida-Topor, Amazones, 40, 174; Foa, Dahomey. 257; SOM. Rapport 
joumalier; ANB, Hocquart; Duncan, Travels, 1: 227. Not al sources agree that 
women went into combat. A missionary stationed in Whydah for three years in 
the early 1860s claimed that a reserve army of women "guarded" the city while 
on1y the men went to war (Laffitte. Dahome, 103-5), and a source from the end 
of the century claimed that men went to war as warriors and women only as 
carriers of supplies (Foa, Dahomey, 254). 
48. Skertchly. Dahomey, 257. 
49. Amegboh. &hanzin, 69. 
50. Quertum. Pays, 57. 
51. Law, "African Response," 292. 
52. Ross, "Autonomous," l49; Forbes, Dahomey, I: 134. 
53. Degbelo, "Amawnes." There is no evidence from the period that clitori­
dectomy was practiced anywhere in Dahomey. However, a number of sources 
from the eighteenth century up to the present describe the massaging of the labia 
of young girls, supposedly in order to enlarge them to enhance sexual pleasure 
(Dalzel, History, xviii; Adams, Remarks, 74-75; Herskovits, Dahomey. 1:277-85; 
and interview, Loko, 4 Feb. 1973). 
54. Le Herisse, Royaume. 68; Burton, "Present State," 406. 
55. Degbelo, Anulzones, 170. 
56. Forbes, Dahomey. 2: 108. 
57. Dunglas. "Premiere," 17. 
58. MMS, Freeman typescript, 324; Burton. Mission, 3: 126; Bowen, Adventures. 
149. A similar story was reported after the fal of the kingdom, when a ddegation 
from the town of Cove, from which women had regularly been taken for service

--- Page 360 ---
Notes to Pages 208-2 1 9  
343 
in the palace. came to Abomey to reclaim them. Of the women contacted, only 
one was wiling to return home (ANS, Rapport mensue1). 
59. Duncan, Travels, I: 234 interview. Agbalu Glele, 26 Oct. 1972; Hazoume, 
"Tata AjacM." 
60. Forbes, Dahomey, 2:143. 
61. MMS, Freeman typescript, 279; MMS, Freeman, "Journal"; Forbes, Daho­
mey. 2: 66, 90; Duncan, Travels. 2: 61-62; Burton, Mission, 3: 213-14. Law mistak­
enly believes that Yewe was the meunon because she was responsible for working 
with the British and the meu was generaJly responsible for relations with foreign­
ers ('"Amazons,''' 255). 
62. Burton. Mission. 3: 243; interview, Agbalu Glele. 9 Sept. 1972. 
63. Forbes, Lmhomey. 2: 71. 
64. Skertchly, Dahomey, 52, 89, 154; Chaudoin, Trois mois, 50. 
65. Forbes. Dahomey, 1:70; 2:178-79; SkertchJy, Lmhomey, 25. 396; interviews. 
Fengbe, 30 July 1972, and Agbalu Glele, 26 Oct. 1972. 
66. Dalzel, History, xi; Skertchly, Dahomey, 60; Forbes, Dahomey, 2:183-84. 
67. IntelView, Avloko, 27 Feb. 1973; Chappet, Cote, 23; Foa, Lmhomey, 192; in­
terviews, Aho, 3 May 1972, and Kinhwe, 24 March 1972; Le Herisse, Royaume. 72; 
Maire, Lmhomey, 51. 
68. Delange, Arts, 70. 
69. Burton, Mission, 4:11. 
70. Interview, Sagbadju Glele, 26 March 1972. 
71. MaupoiJ, "Geomande," 123; MMS, Freeman typescript, 316; d'Almeida, 
"Dab 
.. 
f 
omey, 335, n. 1. 
72. Le Herisse, Royaume. 26. 
73. Burton, Mission, 4: 25]; Beraud, "Note," 376· 
74. MMS, Freeman typescript, 306; Burton, Mission, 4:58; Skertchly, Daho­
mey, 2]1. 
75. Skertchly, Dahomey, 271-72; Burton, Mision, 4:59; Coquery, "Blocus," 
383-84. 
76 M
· 
"F 
" 
. 
eCler, 
on, 232. 
77. Law, "Human Sacrifice," 85, fn. 175; Reid, "Aristocrats," 337-44. All three 
arguments are discussed in Bay, "Trail," I-IS. 
78. MMS, Freeman typescript, 306; Skertchly, Dahomey, 271; Burton, Mission, 
4:59· 
79. Following the conquest, the crown found its way into the collection of the 
Musee de I'Homme in Paris. 
80. Duncan, Travels, 2:220.

--- Page 361 ---
311 
Notes to Pages 2 I 9-231 
81. Forbes, Dahomey, 2: 19-20. The incident is also described by Fanshawe in 
his journal entry of 13 May 1850 (PRO, Journal). Two decades later, Skertchly 
would grumble at seeing a nonfunctioning clock in a home in Whydah that it was 
"truly a prophetic emblem of the utter insignifance of the value of time with the 
Dahoman" (Dahomey. 13). 
82. Portions of this argument are made by Reid ("Aristocrats," 316-80), Law 
("African Response"), Yoder ("Fly and Elephant"), and Ross ("Autonomous," 
n6-55). It is Ross who believes that Gezo was killed by courtiers of Dahomey 
once his policies had been discredited and Glele had obtained the upper hand 
(152-55). 
83. Skertch1y, Dahomey, 433-34. 
84. Reid. "Aristocrats," 344 and 294-95. Reid argues that Gezo generally was 
behind the revived slave trade after 1857. and particularly the trade through Prya 
Nova. 
Chapter 6 ..... The Decline of Dahomey 
1. Interview, Agodeka Behanzin, 3 June 1972. 
2. Forbes, Dahomey, 2: 15-19. 
3. Ibid., I: 15; Burton. Mission, 3: 230. 
4. Skertchly. Dahomey, 367. 
5. This eyewitness account is by a missionary, Father Borghero. The version 
quoted is a translation by Ellis (Ewe-Speaking Peoples, 193-95). The French origi­
nal is printed in Laffitte. Dahome, 106-9. 
6. Aguessy, "Mode," 97; Forbes, Dahomey, 2:56-57; PRO, Fanshawe. 
7. Skertchly, Dahomey, 140, 347-49, 444; Burton, Mission, 3: 146. In their lists 
of the most prominent ministers of state, Skertchly, Burton, and Forbes al omit 
the gau. 
8. Interview, Agodeka Behanzin, 3 June 1972. Confirmed in interview, Sava­
konto, 30 Jan. 1973; interview, descendants of Agbalu Glele, 13 Sept. 1972. 
9. Parrinder, Story, 65-72; Aublet, Guere. 304-5. 
10. Forbes, Dahomey, 1:16-17; Dunglas, "Premiere attaque," 16; Dungias, 
"Deuxieme attaque," 47-57. 
11. Burton, Mission, 4: 165. 
12. Le Hl:risse, Royaume. 86. 
13. Skertchly, Dahomey, 84. 
14. Le Herisse, Royaume, 82-88. Though sources generally claim that the king 
returned virtually al the property of deceased individuals, the de Souza family 
claims that Gezo kept some two-thirds of Francisco Felix de Souza's estate on his 
death in 1849 (de Souza, Famille, 43).

--- Page 362 ---
15. Burton, Mission, 3 :33-
Notes to Pages 235-242 
345 
16. Skertchly, Dahomey, 16; interview, Codjia, 27 Feb. 1973; Forbes, Dahomey, 
1: 111-12.. Another prominent family broken by the monarchy in the 1870S was that 
of one of the handful of ahisigan, principal traders of the monarchy, Quenum. A 
logbook of cases settled by the commandant de cercIe of Abomey in the early years 
of the twentieth century has a large number of cases involving wemesi, persons 
who were made slaves because of a crime against the state committed by their 
head offamily (ASA, Peines). See also Burton, Mission, 3:58. 
17. For example, Le Hhisse (Royaume, 37-44) lists seven: the migan, meu, 
yovogan, adjaho, sogan (king's horseman), topo (minister of agriculture), and 
akplogan (govemorof AIlada). GJeJe (Danxome, 12.8-39) also names seven, though 
he places in a separate category the yovogan and akplogan, on grounds that they 
were physicaly distant from Abomey. For him, the others are the migan, meu, 
gau, ajaho, and binazon (treasurer). Dunglas ("Contribution," part I, 91-93) lists 
eight: the migan, meu, ajaho, gau, kposu (second to the gau), sogan, akplogan, 
and binazon. 
18. Duncan, Travels, 1:275; Fo;), Dahomey, 270-71. 
19. Repin, Tour, 83; Burton, Mission, 4:240; Mercier and Lombard, Guide, 1]; 
Skertchly, Dahomey, 432; interview, Aho, 21 'an. 1972. Glele knew at least conver­
sational Portuguese, the lingua franca of trade in the nineteenth century (Dunglas, 
"DeuxiÝme attaque," 43). 
20. Chaudoin, Trois mois, 269-70. 
21. MMS, Freeman typescript, 311. See also Valdez, Six Years, 1 :339. Forbes (Da­
homey, 2; 82) testifies to the ease with which female relatives could enter and exit 
the palace. 
22. Maupoil, "Geomancie," 162; Chaudoin, as quoted in Dunglas, "Contribu­
tion," part 3, 46-47. 
23. Mercier and Lombard, Guide, 20. Confirmed in Savonkonton interview, 
30 lan. 1973; interview, Sagbadju Glele, 25 July 1972. 
24. Falcon, "Religion," 22; Aguessy, "Mode," 383; interviews. Kinhwe, 24 
March 1972, and Aho, 24 Oct. 1972. 
25. Forbes, Dahomey, 2: 90; MAE, Lartique; Chaudoin. Trois moi$, 270. See also 
Mercier and Lombard, Guide, 20. 
26. Herskovits, Dahomey. 1:110-11; UCB, Bascom, Z74- Herskovits describes 
this system in operation at Jime, which was the personal palace of Behanzin; 
hence, his informant appears to have been referring to the reign of that king. 
27. Le Herisse, Royaume, 27. Agbalu Glele, a son of King Glele, reaffirmed the 
image of the kposi having no particular duties save to accompany the king and

--- Page 363 ---
346 
Notes to Pages 243-250 
hold objects for his personal use (interview, 11 Sept. 1972). Le Hhisse claims that 
there were about forty kposi; however, he may be accepting as literal a symbolic 
use of the term forty: forty and forty-one are used in Fon culture to suggest a 
perfect or ideal number. Maupoil provides a telling anecdote about one ofGezo's 
herbalists who was once summoned to the palace to minister to a sick person. 
When the man discovered that his patient was a kposi, he was so intimidated that 
he refused to approach her. Reassured by the king that he could speak to Kpede. 
the woman, he ended up being renamed Masikpede, "Don't be afraid of Kpede" 
(Maupoil, "Geomancie," 143. fn. 2..). 
28. Forbes, Dahomey, 2:z38; Burton, Mission, 4:241. Burton's comment sug­
gests a constantly changing group of women; new wives were regularly acquired 
by the palace during the course of a king's reign. That view is supported by three 
descendants of Abomey royalty (interviews, Camille Behanzin, 13 July 1972, Aho, 
3 May 1972, and Agbalu Glele, 9 Sept. 197Z). 
29. Skertchly, Dahomey, 262. See discussion of the problem of the roles of the 
kposi in Bay, "Royal Women," 181-88. 
30. Quenum. Pays, 19; interviews, Aho, 3 May 1972; Agbalu Glele, 11 Sept. 1972; 
Kinhwe, 24 March 1972; Ellis (Ewe-Speaking Peoples, 127) claims that they died 
with the king. 
31. Maupoil, "Geomancie," 87; interview, Feliho, 18 September 1972. 
32. Burton, Mission, 3:243. Royal informants included Aho, 21 January 1972> 
Agbalu Glele, 9 Sept. 19]2, and Sagbadju Glele, 26 March 1972. The quote is from 
Sagbad;u. Le Hhisse, Royaume, 77. 
33. Burton, Mission, 3: 149, 243; Le Herisl:, Royaume, 22. 
34. Le Herisse, Royaume, 31-32; Forbes, Dahomey, 1: 34-35. See also 1: 111. 
35. Forbes, Dahomey, 2:184. 
36. For example, Glele's meunon (Wahuton) and Behanzin's miganon (Yo­
voda), meunon (&tolo), and gaunon Oikada) were all sisters of their respective 
kings. Glele had two kposi who were his nieces. Interview, Savakonton, Jime, 
)0 Jan. 19J3. 
37. Le Herisse, Royaume. 34-35. 
38. Burton, Mission, 3:147> 2:180-81; Hazoume, Pade. 4. The Englishman 
Burton sensed a certain rivalry between Adandejan and the bokonon, with whom 
he was lodged. 
39. Thirty-five years later, doing fieldwork in Dahomey, Herskovits found a 
curiously contradictory system of institutionalized friendship. Everyone was said 
to bave a Best Friend, an intimate companion who knew the innermost feelings 
and desires of his or her friend. It was the Best Friend who spoke at a person's 
funeral and who indicated the choice of the deceased for his successor. There are

--- Page 364 ---
Notes to Pages 25J-262 
347 
intriguing echoes of kingly succession disputes in Herskovits's portrayal of a Best 
Friend as the repository of the true wishes of a man, and particularly his descrip­
tion of the hypothetical example of a man who had earlier announced his succes­
sor but changed his mind. Since renouncing the heir publicly would bring shame 
on the heir's family, a man in such a situation would secretly tell only two persons: 
the newly-chosen heir and the Best Friend. The Best Friend in turn would an­
nounce the real choice only at the man's death. The Friend was described as a 
beloved, lifelong companion. Oddly, though, as Herskovits pointed out, the Best 
Friend was institutionalized; it was efectively an office, with two lesser-ranking 
Friends in the wings, ready to replace the Best Friend, should he die before his 
companion. Herskovits was clearly puzzled by the logical constraints of such a 
system. He suspected that the institution was not as widespread as people claimed, 
and noted that a son of the deceased often played the role of Best Friend (Hersko­
vits, Dahomey. 1: 88-92; 239-42). 
40. AMR, Borgbero. See also Skertchly, Dahomey, 472. ANB, Contr6le des 
Chefs. 
41. Verger, Dieux. 189. 
42. Houseman, et al., "Note"; interview, Legonon and Houseman, 29 July 1984. 
43. MMS, Freeman typescript, 188. 
44. Burton, Mission. 4:99. 
45. Ibid., 4: 99; Gleie, Danxome. 74. A Ketu woman who had been a slave in the 
palace claimed that the king had "about four babalawo [diviners]." Shown a 
photo of Gedegbe published in Maupoil's book. she identified him as one of the 
king's diviners (UCS. Bascom). 
46. Glele, Danxome, 74-75-
47. Maupoil found that women were occasionally known to have been diviners 
in Yorubaland; in Dahomey, however, he could find evidence of only two women 
who ever consulted Fa as bokonon. One was a daughter of King Kpengla and the 
other a daughter of the king of Dassa, who ruled during the period of Glele. She 
was also a wife ofSehanzin ("Geomancie." 153-54). 
48. Maupoil, "Geomancie," 84-ll. 
49. Ibid., 69. 
SO. Dunglas, "Contribution," part 2., 90-101; MMS, Freeman typescript, 175; 
Burton, Mission. 3: xvii. Abbe Moulero has recorded a slightly different version 
in "Guezo," 51-59. The atack on Ekpo in early 1858 fulfiled the conditions of the 
prophecy recorded by Forbes, that "if war was made on Katoo, the king would be 
killed" (Dahomey, 1:10). 
51. Interview. Sagbadju Glele, 18 March 1972. Kakai' Glele. as quoted by Co­
query ("Blows," 381), claims that Kondo was mentore<! by the diviner Gedegbe.

--- Page 365 ---
348 
Nares ra Pages 263-267 
However, Gedegbe is also credited with training a man who ultimately challenged 
Kondo, Sasse Koka. 
52. MMS, Freeman typescript, 284; Glele, Danxome, 104-5; Le Herisse, Ro­
yaume, 8-9. These intimate conversations between king and prince are fictional­
ized in Hazoume's Doguicimi. 
53. Ross, "Autonomous," 143-65; Law, "Human Sacrifice," and "African Re­
sponse"; Reid, "Aristocrats," 385-91. Yoder's account of party politics in Dahomey 
recognizes the reality of factions, but makes major errors in discerning individuals 
belonging to the factions ("Fly and Elephant"). My interpretation of the king-as­
prince differs from Reid's. He argues that the king-as-prince was invented to allow 
the monarchy to produce and sell palm oil, an activity otherwise demeaning to a 
warrior aristocracy. 
54. Vallon, "Royaume," 342; MMS, Freeman typescript, 284-85; Repin, Tour, 
86; Forbes, Dahomey, 2: 62. Gezo, of course, had retained two meu when he was 
enstooled-Voglosu and Tometin, his uterine brother and later the mentor to his 
son Badahun. Both had been plotters in the coup that brought Gezo to power and 
both were among the oldest and dosest associates of the king. Forbes listed both 
the "Mayo" and "Toh-mah-tee" as recipients of royal gifts in 1849, which suggests 
that both men were still alive in the 18505. Burton reported in 1864 that To-metti 
"has lately succeeded his father, who was one of Gezo's brothers" (Mission, 4: 83, 
Co. 2). 
55. Repin, Tour; MMS, Freeman to Beecham and Freeman to General Secre­
taries. In fact, when Repin finally did reach the king outside of the presence of the 
meu, the king still denied the French the right to establish a factory in Abomey, 
just as he had denied that right to the English and just as he regularly denied 
European religious missions the right to set up operations in the capital. 
56. MMS, Freeman typescript, 176-82; Vallon, "Royaume," part 1, 341. 
57. Burton, Misswn, 4: 185; Cruick.shank, "Report" ; Duncan, Travels, 2 :305. 
58. Laffitte, Dahome, 88. 
59. Duncan, Travels, 2:305; Forbes, Dahomey, I:33; Ross, "Autonomous," 70-
]1; Law, "African Response," 283-84. Law relates human sacrifice specifically 
and solely to Dahomean militarism. "Human sacrifice in Dahomey . . .  involved 
principally war captives, whose sacrifice served to celebrate Dahomian military 
prowess . . . .  Ending Dahomey's involvement in slave-trading would necessarily 
imply undermining Dahomian militarism, which in turn would necessaril y  in­
volve an attack on human sacrifice" (283-84). 
60. Forbes, Dahomey, 2:171. Law argues that Gezo initially increased the num­
ber of sacrifices but in the 1840S reduced them in response to British demands 
and the encouragement of Francisco Felix de Souza ("Human Sacrifice," 53-87).

--- Page 366 ---
Notes to Pages 268-275 
349 
61. In 1853, Gezo made an offer to the British to abolish human sacrifice. Re­
ceived with skepticism, it would appear to have been a bargaining chip for nego­
tiations; in any event, no one ever called the king's bluff. See discussion in Law, 
"Human Sacrifice," 83-84. The chief involved in the incident in the 1930S was 
Justin Aho, who was accused in 1937 of kiling TeIli (Atelli), a young apprentice of 
a trading woman (interview, Aho, 23 May 1972). 
62. Dunglas. "Premiere attaque," 46. 
63. Dunglas, "Contribution," part 2. 102; d'Almeida, "Dahomey." 1:153. Bur­
ton was told that an older brother. a "notable drunkard" named Codo, had been 
set aside (Mission, 4:137, fn. 2). 
64. Burton, Mission, 3:151, 153; AN, P. K. Gtele, "Dan-hQ-min," 67; Skertchly, 
Dahomey, 128. Bauet credits the cambode with helping Cezo gain power. He re­
mained a central powerful figure enjoying the trust of Gezo through the 1850S 
(Repin, Tour. 84, 87). Sources typically assume that binazon (Binazon) was the 
name of an office, rather than a personal name. 
65. Interviews, Sagbadju Glele, 25 July 1972, and Agodeka Behanzin. 3 June 
1972. 
66. Burton, Mission, 3:152. Yavedo was also seen by Skertchly in 1871 (Daho­
mey,265)· 
67. Dunglas, "Contribution," part 2, 102; interview, Aho, 3 Feb. 1972; Mau­
poil, "Geomancie," 136. A witness in a court case in the early 1900S testified that 
Zoyindi was a "soeur de fetich" (fetish sister) with Gedegbe (ASA, Pcines). Olabiyi 
Yai indicates that such a term may mean a woman who has been initiated to some 
degree into Fa (personal communication, 18 Nov. 1996). 
68. D'Almeida, "Dahomey," 2: 41]. Burton re<:orded rumors speculating about 
who Glele's biological mother might have been, one arguing that she was Mahi 
and another that she was a Euro-African associated with the French factory at 
Whydah (Mission, 3:158). Such rumors suggest that Zoyindi, whatever her origins, 
was not the biological mother of the king. 
Chapter 7 ...",. War, Disintegration, and the Faffure of the Ancestors 
1. Gleie, Danxome, 103, 124-25; Skertchly, Dahomey, 159. Maupoil argues that 
Kondo had his sorcerers cause Ahanhanzo's death from smallpox ("Geomancie," 
138, rn. 1). A Yoruba slave woman, who had been resident in the palace in the late 
nineteenth century, testified in 1951 that "people said that Kondo poisoned a man" 
(UCB, Bascom. 274). 
2. Interview, Aho, 23 May 1972. This appears to be a standard version main­
tained by descendants of Agoliagbo and their allies. I also collected it from Ago­
liagbo (interview, 24 July 1972) and from his son Andre Agoliagbo (3 March 1973).

--- Page 367 ---
350 
Notes to Pages 275-191 
3. Interview, Agodeka Behanzin. 3 June 1972. 
4. Interview, Agbalu Glele, 29 September 1972. See also Aguessy, "Mode," 189. 
5. Accounts of the blockade may be found in Coquery, "Slocus," Dunglas, 
"Contribution," part 3, 12-13, and Foa, Dtlhomey, 33-36. Ross speculates on the 
basis of a sudden change in Dahomean trade policy that Ahanhanzo was over­
thrown in May (214-15). 
6. BuTton, Mission, 3: xi-xii; Frank Les/ie's Popular Monthly, as quoted in 
Rydell, All, 66. The best discussion that I know of the growth of British racism is 
Curtin, Image. 
7. Valuable sources for details of the coming of imperialism to Dahomey 
and the French war against the kingdom include Turner, Bresiliens; Cornevin, 
Ripubliquej and Garcia, Royaume. 
8. GleIe, Danxome. 206-7. 
9. ANB, de Soma a Rodriguez. 
10. See. for example, Garcia. "Archives," 196-99; d'Almeida, "Dahomey," 
2:335-36. 
11. The full text is printed in Cornevin, Republique, 289-90. 
12. Turner, BresilierJs, 256-60. See also de Souza. Famille, 55-57. Garcia sug­
gests that de Souza's dealings with the French had additionally compromised his 
position (Royaume, 44). 
13. Garcia, "Archives," 194-95; Cornevin, Republique, 317-18. Sources disagree 
on the precise date both of Glele's death and of BayoJ's departure from Abomey. 
Bayol left either December 27 or 28, and Glele is said to have died sometime be­
tween December 28 and December 30. I have accepted the dates mentioned by 
Behanzin himself in a letter to the president of France dated April 17, 1890, and 
quoted in Dunglas, "Contribution," part 3, 45. Ironically. in light of the Daho­
mean exhibition at the Chicago Exposition three years later, one of the gifts pre­
sented to Glele by the Bayol mission was a stereoscope set with photos of the Paris 
Exhibition of 1889. 
14. Garcia, Royaume. 51-53. Dunglas claims that Mme. Beraud was from Why­
dah ("Contribution." part 3, 16). 
15. ANB, Rapport, 12 mars 1891. Garcia (Royaume, 69) gives a citation for the 
document as ANB. Rapport, janvier 1890. A copy also exists in France (SOM, 
Rapport, 12 mars 1891). 
Goutle (Gountle) was the sagan of Glele. If Beraud's account is correct, he was 
playing an appropriately loyal role to the monarch (see chapter 3, 116-17). 
16. D'Almeida, "Dahomey," 2:335. 
17. PRO, Africa No. 365, Africa No. 386. 
18. D'Albeca. "Dahomey." llj Chaudoin, Trois moist 182. Garcia argues that

--- Page 368 ---
Notes ro Pages 293-302 
35 1 
Behanzin moved against Visesegan only after a peace treaty with the French was 
signed in October 1890 (Royaume. 27). However. a son of Behanzin claimed that 
Sasse Koka was already dead by the time Behanz.in named his ministers. which 
suggests that the threat of Visesegan and her protege was dealt with at an earlier 
point (interview. Agodeka Behanzin. 3 June 1972). Garcia also suggests that links 
to Tado might have been related to a desire to build alliances against the French 
(Royaume, 82). 
19. Le Herisse, Royaume. 338-40. 
20. Sagbadju Glele and Agodeka Behanzin as quoted by Garcia (Royaume, 
79-81). 
21. Garcia, Royaume, 94, 98. 
22. Le Herisse. Royaume. 344-45. 
23. There are numerous accounts of the war, including a number of published 
diaries by French participants. One of the most thorough contemporary accounts 
is Aublet. Guerre. Garcia's Royaume is the most thorough and balanced treatment 
by a professional historian. 
24. GleM, Danxome, 206-8; interview, Ougoton, 29 June 1972. Although he 
gives no dates in the text, Aublet places his mention of the coup attempt between 
29 Sept. and 2 Oct. in his narrative of the war (Guerre, 246). Garcia links Visesegan 
to Egbo as her "adopted son" (Royaume, 2.6). 
25. Le Herisse, Royaume, 347. See also Garcia. Royaume, 234. The war indem­
nity was set at the strikingly high sum of 15 million francs. and fully one-half was 
demanded in cash within twenty-four hours as a sign of good faith. The highest 
price per head paid for the slaves sent out of Dahomey between 1889 and 1892 had 
been 500 francs. rr we assume that price for each of the five thousand sold, the 
total income from the renewed slave trade was 2.5 million francs, of which a good 
deal had been spent on arms. 
26. ANB, de Souza a Rodriguez. The delegation was not received by any offi­
cials in France, though they did meet with a French counsul in Liverpool on their 
arrival from Lagos in early November 1893 (Garcia, Royaume, 242-44). 
27. ANB, Renseignements. 
28. Le Herisse, Rayaume, 349-50; Dunglas, "Contribution," part 3. 103; SHA, 
Rapport. 
29. Le Herisse, Royaume. 351-52. 
30. Interview, Andre Agoliagbo. 3 March 1973; Hazoume, Pacte, 34-38; GleIe, 
Danxome, 214-15; Garcia, "Archives," 191; Dunglas, "Contribution," part 3, 105. 
See also Emanuel, Traites. 
31. D'Albeca. France, 194; Garcia. "Archives," 191, 192, 20). How. then, do 
oral traditions explain the acknowledged divisions between the descendants of

--- Page 369 ---
352 
Notes to Pages 303-3 / 0  
Behanzin and Agoliago? Essentially, they argue that the feud derives from factors 
in play after the essential decision had been arranged-that Behanzin became 
angry because Gedegbe told Guchili of the decision to make him ruler before the 
king did, or that Behan'Zin's children became angry when Agoliagbo claimed all 
the wives and goods of the king (GIe1e, Danxome, 217; Dunglas, "Contribution," 
pan 3. 107-8). 
32. SOM, Correspondence. Agbidinukun suggests that Behanzin placed a great 
deal of hope in the possibility of success by the envoys sent to Europe (Le Herisse, 
Royaume, 339-40, 348-49). 
33. SOM, Correspondence. Two sources claim that among those sacrificed 
were Behanzin's AfIO-Brazilian artillerymen, Georges de Souza and Jose Qucnum 
(interview, Dosso-Yovo, 9 Nov. 1972; d'Albeca, "Dahomey," 126). 
34. Tahon, Garnets, 65-66. Three other sources acknowledge this incident: 
Moulero, "Conquete," 67; AN, P. K. Glele, "Royaume"; and Leprince, Deux. 
35. Newbury, "Note," 151; ANB, Correspondences. 
36. ANS, Rapport, 1895; ANS, Rapport, 1896; Mikponhoue, "Administration." 
37. ANB, Gbohayida. 
38. ASA, Peines. 
39. A list of children born of these unions who were in residence on the 
Abomey plateau in 1928 includes names of twenty-six children, their mothers, and 
their European fathers. Fully seventeen of the mothers are identifiable as women 
of the royal family or families of ruling chiefs. ASA, List.

--- Page 370 ---
Glossary 
Adandozan-seventh king of Dahomey (1797-1818) 
Adonon-first kpojito of Dahomey (c. 1]16-1740) 
Agaja-third king of Dahomey (c. 1716-1740) 
Agasu-mythical being said to be the son of a princess of Tado and a leopard; 
founder of the royal family of Dahomey 
Agasuvi-literally child(ren) of Agasu; the royal family of Dahomey 
agbajigbeto-Iiterally hunter in the reception area; spy 
Agoliagbo-eleventh king of Dahomey (1894-1900) 
Agongla-sixth king of Dahomey (1789-1797) 
Agontime-sixth kpojito of Dahomey (1818-1858) 
ahosi-dependent, follower, subordinate. or wife of the king 
ahovi-child(ren) of the king; princes, or princesses 
ajaho-minister of religion, head of the secret police 
Akaha-second king of Dahomey 
Alladahonu-people from Allada, specifically the royal family of Dahomey 
anato-free person, commoner 
Behanzin-tenth king of Dahomey (1889-1894) 
bokonon-diviner of the Fa system of divination 
Chai-third kpojito of Dahomey (1774-1789) 
daklo-woman within the palace who conveyed messages between the king and 
visitors 
Fa-god of divination; system of divination derived from the Ifa system of 
Yoruba culture 
gandoba -women slaves given to retainers outside the palace whose female chil-
dren returned to service in the paJace 
gau-war chief 
Gbetome-visible world, land of the living 
Gezo-eighth king of Dahomey (1818-1858) 
Glele-ninth king of Dahomey (1858-1889) 
Hwanjile-second kpojito of Dahomey (1740-1774) 
Hweda-people ofk.ingdom along the coast conquered by Dahomey in 1727; 
name of kingdom usually transcribed Whydah or Ouidab 
joto-spiritual presence of an ancestor in one of his/her descendants 
353

--- Page 371 ---
354 
Glossary 
Kamlin-eighth kpojito of Dahomey (1889-1894) 
Kanai-ninth kpojito of Dahomey (1894-1900) 
kannumon-slave, captive 
Kentobasin-fifth kpojito of Dahomey (1797-1818) 
Kpengla-fifth king of Dahomey (1774-1789) 
kpo-leopard, totem of the royal family of Dahomey 
kpojito-literally. she who whelped the leopard; the reign-mate to the king 
kposi-adept of the spirit of the founder of the royal family; class of high-
ranking wives of the king 
Kutome-Jand of the dead; kingdom of the shadows 
legede-messengers of the kings. popularly called half-heads because of their 
characteristic way of alternately shaving one side of the head 
Lisa-creator god made head of all the spirits by kpojito Hwanjile 
Mawu-creator god made head of all the spirits by kpojito Hwanjile 
meu-second minister. responsible for territory south of Alada. responsible for 
members of royal family 
migan-prime minister. chief executioner 
na daho-literaly eldest princess, title of senior daughter of the reigning king 
Nesuhwe-cult dedicated to the deified members of the royal family 
Sakpata-group of deities linked to the earth and popularly associated with 
smallpox 
Senume-fourth kpojito of Dahomey (1789-1797) 
sogan-chief of the horse, master of the horse 
Tegbesu-fourth king of Dahomey (1740-1774) 
tohosu-king of the waters; abnormal child believed to be spirit creature 
tohwiyo-mythical being, often a wild animal, acknowledged as founder of 
, clan  
vigan-Iiteraly chief of the children; head of the branch of the royal family 
descended from a given king 
vodWl-god, deity 
vodunon-person responsible for a god; priest; "mother" of a god 
vodunsi-dependent, follower, initiate of a god; adept of a god; "wife" of a god 
Wegba;a-first king of Dahomey 
yovogan-chief for foreigners; "chief of the whites," responsible for trade rela-
tions in Whydah 
zinkponon-literally mother or owner of the stool; titleholder 
Zoyindi-seventh kpojito of Dahomey (1858-1889) 
Zumadunu-tohosu-child fathered by King Akaba, bead of al the deities in the 
nineteenth century

--- Page 372 ---
< 
, 
, 
. 
Bibliography of Sources Cited 
Published Materials 
Adams, Captain John. Remarks on the Country Extendingfrom Cape PaImm to 
the River Congo. London, 1813. 
Adande. Alexandre. Les Rtmdes des ro;s du Dahomey. Dakar: IFAN, 1962. 
Adoukonou, 8. Jakms pour une theologie africaine: essai d'une hermtneutique 
chrttienne du vodun dtlhomeen. Paris: Lethielleux. 1979. 
Agbo, Casimir. Histoire de Ouidah. Avignon: Pressses Universelles. 1959. 
Aguessy, Honorat. "Du Mode d'existence de I'etat sous Ghezo." These de troi­
sieme cycle, Univ. de Paris, 1970. 
Akinjogbin, I. A. Dahomey and its Neighbors: 1708-1818. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1967. 
Amegboh, Joseph. Behanzin, Roi d'Abomey. Paris: ABC, 1975. 
Acens, W 
.• and Ivan Karp. Creativity of Power. Washington DC: Smithsonian In­
stitution, 1989. 
Argyie, W. J. The Fon of Dahomey. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1966. 
Atkins, John. A Voyage to Guinen, Brasil and the West Indies. 1735. Reprint. lon-
don: Frank Cass, 1970. 
Aublet, E. La Guerre au Dahomey, 1888-1893. Paris, 1894. 
Barbou, Alfred. Histoire de ltI guerre au Dahomey. Paris, 1893. 
Bay. Edna G. "Belief, Legitimacy and the Kpojito: an Institutional History of the 
'Queen Mother' in Precolonial Dahomey." The Journal of African History 36, 
no. I (1995): 1-17. 
--. "The Royal Women of Abomey." Ph.D. diss., Boston University, 1977. 
--. "On the Trail ofthe Bush King: A Dahomean Lesson in the Use ofEvi-
dence." History in Africa 6 (1979): 1-15. 
---. "Servitude and Worldly Success in the Palace of Dahomey." In Women 
and Sltlvery in Africa, edited by Claire C. Robertson and Martin A. Klein. 
Madison: Univ. of Wisconsin Press, 1983. 
Beraud, Xavier. "Note sur le Dahome." Bulletin de la societe de gtographie 12, 
5th series (1866): 371-86. 
Berbain, Simone. Le Comptoir Franrais de Juda au XVI/le silcle. Memoires de 
I'IFAN. no. 3. Paris: Larose, 1942. 
355

--- Page 373 ---
356 
Bibliography 
Bertho. Iacques. "La Parente des Yoruba aux pcuplades de Dahomey et Togo." 
Afrim 19. no. 2 (1949): 121-32. 
Blanchely, M. "Au Dahomey." Les Misions Catholiques 23 (1891): 534-37. 
Blier, Suzanne Preston. "Field Days: Melville J. Herskovits in Dahomey." History 
in AfriUl 16 (1989)Ƥ 1-22. 
--.. "The Path of the Leopard: Motherhood and Majesty in Early Dan­
home." Journal of African History 36. no. 3 (1995): 391-417. 
B05man. Wiliam. A New and Accurate Description of the Coast of Guinea. 1705. 
Reprint, with introduction by J. R. Willis and notes by J. D. Fage and R. E. 
Bradbury. New York: Bames & Noble, 1967. 
Bouet. Auguste. "Le Royaume de Dahomey." I1lustration 20 (24 July 1852): 59-62. 
Bowen, T. J. Adventures and Missionary Labours in Several Countries in the Inte­
rior of Africa from I&'9 to 1856. 1857. Reprint. with introduction by E. A. 
Ayandele. London: Frank Cass, 1968. 
Brue, A de. "Voyage fait en 1843 dans le royaume de Dahomey." Revue coloniale 7 
(1845): 55-68. 
Buckley, Anthony D. "The God of Smallpox: Aspects ofYoruba Religious 
Knowledge." Africa 55, no. 2 (1985): 187-200. 
Burton, Richard P. A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome. 1864. 2 vols. The Memo­
rial Edition ofthe Works of Captain Sir Richard F. Burton, vols. 3 and 4. Ed­
ited by Isabel Burton, London. 1893. 
--.. "The Present State of Dahome." Transactions of the Ethnological Society 
of London 3 (1865): 400-8. 
C, Fara. "Ouidah, cite de tolerance." ]eune Afrique, no. 1682 (1-7 April 1993): 40. 
"Captain Philip's Journal of his Voyage from England to Cape Mounseradoe 
in Africa; and thence along the Coast of Guiney to Whidaw, the Island of 
SI. Thomas, and so forward to Barbadoes." Vo!. 6 of A Collection o/Voyages 
and Travels. Edited by A. Churchill. London, 1732. 
Chapman, D. A. "The Human Geography of Eweland." In Premiere conference 
internationale des Africanists de ['Ouest 1 (1950): 79-101. 
Chappet, E. LA C6te des Esclaves: rapport SUT le memoire de M. le DocteuT prns. 
Lyon, 1881. 
Chaudoin, E. Trois mois de captivitt au Dahomey. Paris. 1891. 
Coissy. Anatole. "L'arrivee des 'Alladahonou' a Houawe." Etudes dahomcennes 13 
(1955): 31-31. 
--.. "Un Regne de femme dans I'ancien royaume d' Abomey." Etudes daho­
meennes 2 (1949): 5-8. 
Coquery, Catherine "Le blocus de Whydah (1876-1877) et la rivalite franco­
anglaise au Dahomey." CahieT$ d'etudes africaines 2, no. 3 (1962): 373-419.

--- Page 374 ---
Bibliography 
357 
Coquery-Vidrovitch. Catherine. "De la traite des esclaves a I'exportation de 
I'huile de palme et des palmistes au Dahomey: XIXe siecle." In The Devel­
opment of Indigenous Trade and Markers in West Africa. Edited by Claude 
Meillassoux. London: Oxford Univ. Press, 1971. 
Cornevin, Robert. La Republique Populaire du Benin.. Paris: Maisonneuve & 
Larose. 1981. 
Cruickshank, B. "Report by B. Cruickshank of his Mission to the King ofDa­
homey." Parliamemary Papers 9 (1850): Appendix K. 
Curtin, Philip. The Image of Africa: British Ideas and Actions, 1780-1850. Madi­
son: Univ. of Wisconsin Press, 1964. 
"Dahomey a la fin du XIXe siecle, Le" Etudes dahomeennes 9 (1953): 18-23. 
d'A1beca, A1exandre L. "Au Dahomey." Le Tour du monde 68 (4 Aug. 1894): 
65-80; (n Aug. 1894): 81-96; (18 Aug. 1894): 97-112; (25 Aug. 1894): Il3-28. 
--. La France au Dahomey. Paris. 1895. 
d'Almeida, Leslie Edouard Ayikwe. "Le Dahomey sous le regne de Dada GIegIe." 
These de troisieme cycle. Universite de Paris, 1973. 
d'Almeida-Topor, Heiene. Les Amazones. Paris: Rocbevigne, 1984. 
d'Oliveira. Th. Constant-Ernest. La Visite du musee d'histoire d'Abomey. n.p., 
1970. 
Dalzel. Archibald. The History of Dahamy, an inland Kingdom of AfriCl1. 1793. Re­
print, with an introduction by J. D. Fage. London: Frank Cass, 1967. 
de Souza. Norberto Francisco. "Contribution a I'histoire de la famille de Souza." 
Etudes dnhomeennes 13 (1955): 17-21. 
de Souza. Simonc. LA Famille de Souza du Benin-Toga. Cotonou: Editions du 
Benin, 1992. 
Degbelo, Amelie. "Les Amazones du Danxome. 1645-1900." Memoire de mal­
trise d'histoire, Universite Nationale du Benin, 1989. 
Delange, Jacqueline. Arts et peuples de I'Afrique Noire. Paris: Galimard, 1967. 
Diamond. Stanley. "Dahomey: A Proto-State in West Africa." ph.D. dis .• Co­
lumbia University, 1951. 
Djivo, Adrien. Guezo: In renovation du Dahomey. Paris: ABC, 1977. 
Duncan, John. Travels in Western AfriCl1, in 1845 & 1846. 2 vols. 1847. Reprint 
(2 vols. in 1). London: 'ohnson Reprint, 1967. 
Dunglas, Edouard. "Contribution a I'histoire du Moyen-Dahomey," parts 1, 2, 
and 3. Etudes dahomeennes 19, part I (1957): 7-185; 20, part 2 (1957)= 3-152; 21, 
part 3 (1958): 7-116. 
--. "Deuxieme attaque des Dahomeens contre Abeokuta {IS mars 1864)." 
Etudes dahomeennes 2 (1949): 37-58.

--- Page 375 ---
358 
Bibliography 
--. "La premiere attaque des Dahomeennes contre Abeokuta {] mars 1851)." 
Etudes dahomeennes 1 (1948): 7-19. 
Edwards, Paul, ed. The Life of Olaudah Equiano, or GustaVU$ Vassa the African. 
Harlow, Essex UK: Longman, 1989. 
ElIis, Alfred Burden. The Ewe-Speaking Peoples of the Slave Coast of West AfriCl1. 
London, 1890. 
Emmanuel, Kar!' "Les Traites de Protectorat Françs dans le Dahomey." These 
de troisieme cycle, Universite de Toulouse, 1970. 
Falcon, Paul. "Religion du vodun." Etudes dtlhomtennes, n.S. 18-19 (1970): 1-211. 
Fo;\, :Mouard. Le Dahomey. Paris, 1895. 
Forbes, Frederick E. Dahomey and the Dahomans. 2 vols. 1851. Reprint. London: 
Frank Cass. 1966. 
Fuglestad, Finn. "Quelques refiexions sur l'histoire et les institutions de l'ancien 
royaume du Dahomey et de ses voisins." Bulletin de I'IFAN 39, ser. S, no. 3 
(1977): 493-517. 
Garcia. Lu, Messanvi. "Archives et tradition orale." Cahiers d'etudes africaines 16, 
no. 61-62 (1976): 189-206. 
--. Le royaume du Dahome face a la penetration coloniafe. Paris: Karthala. 
1988. 
Gavoy, Administrateur. "Notes historiques sur Ouidah." Etudes dahomeennes 13 
(1955): 53-56. 
Gayibor, Nicoue Lodjou. ed. "Memoire contenant des obsetvations sur quel­
ques points de la c6te de Guinee visitees en mil sept cent quatre vingt six par 
la corvette le Pandour, et sur la possibilite d'y faire des etablissements." In 
Textes et documents d'histoire de l'anaenne C6te des Esclaves (Anlo-Genyi), 
J660-1835. Cotonou: Universite Nationale du Benin, 1976. 
Geggus, David. "Sex Ratio. Age and Ethnicity in the Atlantic Slave Trade: Data 
from French Shipping and Plantation Records." Journal of African History 30 
(1989): 23-44· 
Gleason, Judith. Agotime: Her Legend. New York: Grossman, 1970. 
Glele, Maurice Ahanhanzo. Le Danxome. Paris: Nubia, 1974. 
Grandin, Commandant. A l'assaut du pays des noirs. Le Dahomey. Paris, 1895. 
Guillevin, M. "Voyage dans I'interieur du royaume du Dahomey," Nouvelles an-
m;des des voyages 2 (June 1862): 292-93. 
Hair, P. E. H 
.• Adam Jones, and Robin Law, eds. Barbot on Guinea: The Writings 
ollean Barbot on West Africa, 1678-1712. 2 vols. London: Hakluyt Society. 
1992. 
Hazoume, Paul. Cinquattte ans d'apostolat. Lyon, n.d.

--- Page 376 ---
Bibliography 
359 
--. "La ConquHe du royaume houedah par les Dahomeens au XVle siecle." 
Bulletin de l'enseignement de l'Afrique Deddentale Franfaise (1921): 41-45. 
--. Doguicimi. Paris: Larose, 1938. 
--. Le pacte de sang nu Dahomey. 1937. Travaux et memoires de J'Institut 
d'Ethnologie 25. Reprint. Paris: Institut d'Ethnologie. 1956. 
--. "Tata AjachÎ soupo ma ha awouinyan," parts 1-3. La Reconnaissance 
AfriCQine 1 (1925): 7-9; 2 (1925): 7-8; 3 (1925): 7-8. 
Henige, David. and Maricn Johnson. "Agaja and the Slave Trade: Another Look 
at the Evidence." History in Africn 2 (1976): 57-67. 
Herskovits. Melville J. Dahomey: An Ancient West African Kingdom. 2 vols. New 
York: J. J. Augustin, 1938. 
Herskovits, Melville J., and Frances S. Herskovits. DahomƜn Narrative. Evans­
ton: Northwestern Univ. Press, 1958. 
--,. An Outline of Dahomean Religious Belief Memoirs of the American 
Anthropological Association, no. 41. Menasha WI: American Anthropological 
Assn., 1933. 
Houseman, Michael, et al. "Note sur la structure ooiutive d'une ville histo­
rique." Cahiers d'etudes africaines 26, no. 104 (1986): ,)27-46. 
Johnson, Marion. "Bulfinch Lambe and the Emperor of Pawpaw: a Footnote to 
Agaja and the Slave Trade." History in Africa ,) (1978): 34.5-,)0. 
Johnson, Samuel. The History of the Yorubas. 1921. Reprint. London: Lowe & 
Brydone, 1969. 
Jones, Adam. "Semper Aliquid Veteris: Printed Sources for the History of the 
Ivory and Gold Coasts, 1500-1750." Journal of African History 27, no. 2 (1986): 
215-3')· 
Labarthe, P. Voyage it Ul cMe de Guinee. Paris, 1803. 
Labat, R Pere. Voyage du Chevalier des Marchais en Guink, isks voisines, et a 
Cayenne. 2 vols. Paris, 1730. 
Lafitte, M. l'Abbe. Le Dahome: souvenirs de voyage et de mission. 6th 00. Tours, 
1883· 
Lander, Richard. Records of Captain CUlpperton's Last Expedition to Africa. 2 vols. 
London, 1830. 
Law, Robin. "An African Response to Abolition: Anglo-Dahomian Negotia­
tions on Ending the Slave Trade, 1838-77." Sltlveryand Abolition 16, no. 3 
(Dec. 1995): 281-310. 
--. "The 'Amazons' of Dahomey." Paideuma 39 (1993): 245-60. 
--. "Dahomey and the Slave Trade: Reflections on the Historiography of 
the Rise of Dahomey." Journal of AfriCi1n History 27, no. 2 (1986): 237-67.

--- Page 377 ---
360 
Bibliography 
--. "Further Light on Bulfinch Lambe and the 'Emperor ofPav.rpaw': King 
Agaja of Dahomey's Letter to King George J of England, 1726." History in 
Africn 17 (1990): 211-26. 
--. "History and Legitimacy: Aspects of the Use of the Past in Precolonial 
Dahomey." History in Africa 15 (1988); 431-56. 
--. "Human Sacrifice in Pre-colonial West Africa." Africnn Affairs 84 (1985): 
53-87. 
--. "Ideologies of Royal Power. The Dissolution and Reconstruction of 
Political Authority on the 'Slave Coast,' 1680-1750." Africn 57, no. 3 (1987): 
321-44. 
--. "'Legitimate' trade and gender relations in Yorubaland and Dahomey." 
In From Slnve Trade to 'Legitimate' Commerce: The Commercinl transition in 
ninetenth-century West Africa, edited by Robin Law. Cambridge: Cambridge 
Univ. Press, 1995. 
--. "A Neglected Account of the Dahomian Conquest of Whydah (1727): 
The 'Relation de la Guerre de Juda' of the Sieur Ringard of Nantes." History 
jn Africn 15 (1988): 323· 
--. The Oyo Empire c. 1600-c. 18J6. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1977. 
---. "The Politics of Commercial Transition: Factional Conflict in Dahomey 
in the Context of the Ending of the Atlantic Slave Trade." Journal of American 
History 38, no. 2 (1997): 213-33. 
--. "Royal Monopoly and Private Enterprise in the Atlantic Trade: The 
Case of Dahomey." Journal of African History 18, no. " (1977): 555-77· 
---. The Slave Coast of West Africa, 1550-t750. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1991. 
--. "The Slave Trader as Historian: Robert Norris and the History of Daho-
mey." History in Africa 16 (1989): 219-35. 
---. "Slave-Raiders and Middlemen, Monopolists and Free-Traders: the 
supply of slaves for the Atlantic trade in Dahomey, c. 1715-1850." Journal of 
African History 30, no. 1 (1989): 45-68. 
---. "Warfare on the West African Slave Coast, 1650-1850." In War jn the 
Tribal Zone: Expanding States and Indigenous Waifare, edited by R. Brian 
Ferguson and Neil L. Whitehead. Santa Fe NM: School of American Research 
Press, 1992. 
Le Herisse, A. CAnoen royaume du Dahomey. Paris: LaroSt, 1911. 
Leprince, lules. Mes Deux premiers voyages. CouIommiers, 1897. 
Lombard, J. "Le Moyen de controle social dans l'ancien Dahomey." Le Monde 
non Chretien, n.s.)8 (April-June 1956): 145-57. 
M'Leod, John. A Voyage to Africa. 1820. Reprint. London: Frank Cass, 1971. 
Maire, Capitaine. Dahomey. Besanøon: Cariage, 1905.

--- Page 378 ---
Bibliography 
361 
Manning, Patrick. Slavery and African Life. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 
1990. 
--. Slavery, Colonialism, and Economic Growth in Dahomey, 1640-1960. 
Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 198z. 
Mattei, Commandant. &s-Niger, Benoue, Dahomey. Grenoble, 18.90. 
Maupoil, Bernard. "La Geomancie a I'ancienne COte des Esdaves." These pour 
le doctorat es lettres, Universite de Paris, 1943. 
Mercier, Paul. Civilisations du Benin. Paris: Societe continentale d'ed.itions mod­
ernes ilustrees, 1962. 
--.. "The Fon of Dahomey." In African Worlds, edited by DaryU Forde. lon­
don: Oxford Univ. Press, 1954. 
Mercier, Paul, and J. Lombard. Guidedu musee d'Abomey. Porto Novo: IFAN, 
1959· 
Mikponhoue, Hugues Theodore. "L'Administration coloniale fran,?ise dans 
I'ancien royaume du Danhome de 1894 2 1920." These du U. E. R. d'Histoire, 
1975· 
Morton-Williams, Peter. "The Yoruba Kingdom ofOya." In West African King­
doms in the Nineteenth Century, edited by Daryll Forde and P. M. Kaberry. 
London: Oxford Univ. Press, 1967. 
--. "A Yoruba Woman Remembers Servitude in a Palace of Dahomey, in 
the Reigns of Kings Glele and Behanzin." Africa 63, no. 1 (1993): 102-17. 
Moulero, Abbe Th. "Conquete de Ketou par Glele et conquete d'Abomey par la 
France." Etudes dahomeennes, n.s. 4 (May 1965): 61-68. 
---. "Guezo ou Guedizo Massigbe." Etudes dahomeennes, n.s. 4 (May 1965): 
51-59· 
Nardin, lean-Claude. "La reprise des relations franco-dahomeennes au XIXe 
siede. La Mission d'Auguste Bouet a la cour d'Abomey (1851)." Cahiers 
d'etudes africaines 7, no. 15 (1967): 59-126. 
Newbury, Colin. "A Note on the Abomey Protectorate." Africa 29 (1959): 146-55. 
Norris, Robert. Memoirs of the Reign of Bossa Ahadee, King of Dahomy. 1789. Re­
print. London: Frank Cass. 1968. 
Obichere, Boniface I. "Change and Innovation in the Administration of the 
Kingdom of Dahomey." Journal of AjriClm Studies 1, no. 3 (1974): 235-51. 
Palau Marti, Monserrat. Le roi-dieu au Benin. Paris: Berger-Levrault, 1964. 
Parrinder, E. G. The Story of Ketu. Ibadan: Ibadan Univ. Press, 1967. 
Pires, Vicente Ferreira. Vingem de Africa em 0 reino de Dahome. Edited by Clado 
Ribeiro de Lessa. Sao Paulo: Companhia &iitora Nadonal, 1957. 
Polanyi, Kar!' Dahomey and the Slave Trade. Seattle: Univ. of Washington Press. 
1966.

--- Page 379 ---
362 
Bibliography 
Pommegorge, Pruneau de. Description de la nigritie. Amsterdam. 1789. 
Quenum. Maximilien. Les ancetres de la [ami/le Quenum. Langres: Dominique 
Gueniot, 1981. 
--,. Au pnys des Fans. 3rd ed. Paris: Maisonneuve et Larose, 1983. 
Rattray. R. S. Ashanti. 1923. Reprint. New York Negro Univ. Press, 1969. 
Reade, W. Winwood. Savage Africa. London, 186 ... 
Reid, John. "Warrior Aristocrats in Crisis: The Political Effects of the Transition 
from the Slave Trade to Palm Oil Commerce in the Nineteenth Century 
Kingdom of Dahomey." Ph.D. diss., University of Stirling, Scotland, 1986. 
Repin, Dr. "Voyage au Dahomey." Le Tour du monde 7 (1863): 76-109. 
"Report by B. Cruickshank Esq. of his Mission to the King of Dahomey." Parlia­
mentary Papers 9 (1849), appendix K. 
Robertson, Claire c., and Martin A. K1ein. "Women's Importance in African 
Slave Systems." In Women and Slavery in Africa, edited by Claire C. Robert­
son and Martin A. Klem. Madison: Univ. of Wisconsin Press, 1983. 
Robertson, G. A. Notes on Africa. London, 1819. 
Ross, David. "The Anti-Slave Trade Theme in Dahoman History: An Examina­
tion ofthe Evidence." History in Africn 9 (1982): 2.63-71. 
--,. "The Autonomous Kingdom of Dahomey, 1818-1894." Ph.D. diss., Uni-
versity of London, 1967. 
RydeU, Robert W. AU the WorldÌ a Fair. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press, 1984. 
Sacks, Karen. Si5ters and Wives. Urbana: Univ. of Illinois Press, 1982. 
Segurola, B. Dictionna;re Fon-Franfais. 2 vols. 1963. Reprint. Cotonou: Centre 
Catechetique de Porto Novo. 1968. 
Skertchly. J. A. Dahomey As It Is. London, 1874. 
Smith, Wiliam. A New Voyage to Guinea. 1744. Reprint. London: Frank Cass, 
1967· 
Snelgrave, Wil liam. A New Account of Some Parts of Guinea and the Slave Trade. 
1734. Reprint. London: Frank Cas, 1971. 
Soumonni, Elisee. "The Compatibility of the slave and palm oil trades in Daho­
mey, 1818-1858." In From Slave Trade to 'Legitimate' Commerce: The Commer­
cial transition in nineteenth-century West Africa, edited by Robin Law. Cam­
bridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1995. 
Tahon, æneral. Camels du General Tahon: Avec les batisseurs de l'Empire. Paris: 
Bernard Grasset, 1947. 
lidjani, A. Serpos. "Notes sur le mariage au Dahomey." P.tudes dahomeennes 6 
(1951): 27-107· 
lingbe-Azalou. Albert. "A propos de mythe et inceste clans I'ancien royaume du 
Danxome." Cotonou, 1993.

--- Page 380 ---
Bibliography 
363 
Turner, J. Michael. "Les Bresiliens-The Impact of Former Brazilian Slaves 
upon Dahomey." Ph.D. dis .• Boston University, 1975. 
Valdez, Francisco Travassos. Six Years of Cl Travellers Life in Western Africa. Lon­
don, 1861. 
VaJlon. A. "Le Royaume de Dahomey." Revue maritime et coloniale 1, part I 
(1860): 341-45. 
--. "Le Royaume de Dahomey." Revue maritime et colonitlle 3, part 2 (1861): 
329-58. 
Van Dantzig, A.. ed. The Dutch and the Guinea Coast, 1674-1742: A Collection 
of Documents from the General Srate Archiyt at the Hague. Accra: Academy of 
Arts and Sciences, 1978. 
Vansina, Jan. Kingdoms of the Savannah. Madison: Univ. of Wisconsin Press, 
1966. 
Verger, Pierre. "Le Culte des vodoun d' Abomey aurait-il Me apporte a Saint­
Louis de Maranhon par la mere du roi Ghezo?" Etudes dahometlnes 8 (1952): 
19-24. 
--. Dieux d'Afrique. Paris: Paul Hartmann. 1954. 
---. "Echanges de cadeaux entre rois d'Abomey et souverains europeens aux 
XVIIIe et XIXe siecles." Bulletin d'IFAN 32, serie D, no. 3 (July 1970): 741-54-
--. Flux et reflux de la traite des negres entTe le Golfe de Benin et Bahia de 
Todos os Santos. Paris: Mouton, 1968. 
--. Notes sur le culte des oron et vodun. Memoires d I'IFAN. no. 51. Dakar: 
IFAN. 1957. 
Waterlot. Em. G. us Bas-Reliefs des Bdtiments royaux d'Abomey. Paris: Institut 
d'Ethnologie. 1926. 
Yai. Olabiyi. "From Vodun to Mawu: Monotheism and History in the Fon Cui· 
tural Area." Sapina Newsletter 4, nos. 2-3 (1992): 10-29. 
Yoder, John C. "Fly and Elephant Parties: Political Polarization in Dahomey, 
1840-1870." Journal of African History 15. no. 3 (1974): 417-32. 
Archives 
Benin 
Archives Nationales du Benin (ANB) 
Controle des Chefs, Abomey et A1lada. c. 1925. 
Correspondences du 16 avril au 16 decembre 1894. Serie E. Dossier I. Il, and Il, 
Expeditions de 1890 -94. 
F. de Souza a Candido Rodriguez, ave, Behanzin a Acherigbe, 25 mars 1893. 
Gbohayida a Aho, 13 juin 1904.

--- Page 381 ---
364 
Bibliography 
Hocquart, M. "Rapport Politique." 9 fevrier 1891. 
Rapport adresse par l'interprete X. Beraud a Monsieur le Resident de France aux 
Etablissements du Golfe de Benin, 12 mars 1891. Dossier IE3, Register X. 
Rapport de l'interprete Xavier Beraud, janvier 1890. Dossier K. 
Rapport mensue1, juillet 1895. 
Rapport sur les negotiations entamees avec Behanzin, n.d. 
Renseignements du 27 novembre 1892 au 26 septembre 1893. 
Archives de la Sous· Prefecture d'Abomey (ASA) 
Commandant de Cerde d'Abomey au Gouverneur du Dahomey, 19 avril 1935. 
List nominatif des mNis du cerde d' Abomey, 24 fevrier 192i1. 
Peines Disciplinaires et Conciliations, novo 1905-nov. 1908. 
England 
Public Record Ofice (PRO) 
Africa No. 365. CO 879129. 
Africa No. 386. CO 879/31. 
Journal of Arthur Fanshawe. FO 84/827. 
Methodist Missionary Society, London (MMS) 
Freeman, Thomas Birch. "Journal of a Journey to Badagry, Aku and Dabo· 
mey-1842-43." Biog. W. Afr. 2, Stack QI. 
Freeman, Thomas Birch. Typescript of untitled book, n.d. Biog. W. Afr. 5, 
Stack QI. 
Freeman to Beecham, 12 March 1855. Copy Book 18, Biog. W. Africa 4> Stack QI. 
Freeman to General Secretaries, London, 20 July 1855. Copy Book 22, Biog. W. 
Africa 4, Stack QI. 
France 
Archives Nationales, Section Outre·Mer (SOM) 
Rapport de route: Mission a Abomey de M.le Lt. Gouverneur Jean 8ayol, nov.­
dec. 1889. Dah. 3, Dossier I. 
Rapport journa lier: Mission a Abomey de M. le Lt. Gouvemeur Jean Bayol, 21 
nov.-2iI dk 1889. Dahomey 3, Dossier I. 
Correspondence, Dab. 1, Dossier 13. 
Rapport adresse par l'interprete X. Beraud a Monsieur le Resident de France aux 
Etablissements du Golfe de Benin. Dahomey 3, Dossier 2.

--- Page 382 ---
Bibliography 
365 
"Rǈflexions sur luda par les Sieurs de Chenevert et Abbe Bulet." 1776. M-en­
Provence, Depot des Fortifications des Colonies: Cotes d' Afrique, ms. lll. 
Archives Nationales, Paris (AN) 
Glele. Pogla K. "Le Royaume du Dan-h6-min: tradition orale et histoire ecrite." 
1971. 
Service Historique de I'Etat-major de l'Armee, Vincennes (SHA) 
Rapport sur les Operations du Corps Expeditionnaire du Dahomey en 1893-94. 
Dahomey Carton 1. 
Ministere des Affaires Etrangeres (MAE) 
Lartique, J. "Relation du voyage a Abomey." Memoires et Documents. tome 51 
(1838-62). 
Italy 
Society of African Missions, Rome (AMR) 
Borghero, R. P. "Journal de la Mission du Dahomey, 1860-1864." 
Senegal 
Archives Nationales du senegal (ANS) 
Rapport politique mensuel, juillet 1895. 2G1-31. 
Rapport politique mensuel, juin 1896. 2GI-32. 
USA 
University Archives, Bancroft Library, University of California at Berkeley (UCB) 
Wiliam R Bascom, 1950-51. Yoruba Field Notes. 1-Meko-1-360. 
Interviews and Personal CommunIcations 
Adjanahudegbo, Da. Zagnanado. 18 Oct. 1972. 
Adonon, Da. Abomey, 22 Dec. 1972. 
Adonon. Na, Gbonugan Gohonu, and Da Hangbesi. Abomey, 16 Oct. 1972. 
Adonon, Na. Abomey, 13 Oct. 1972. 
Agbado, Da. Abomey, 17 and 23 June 1972. 
Agessi Voyon, Da. Abomey, 28 April 1972. 
Agoliagbo, Andre. Gbindo, 3 March 1973.

--- Page 383 ---
366 
Bibliography 
Agoliagbo, Da. Gbindo, 24 July 1972. 
Aho. RenŪ. Abomey. 21 Jan., 3 Feb., 3 and 23 May, and 24 Oct. 1972. 
Akati, Gouoen Simon. Abomey, 30 July 1984-
Author's field notes, Abomey, 1972-73. 
Avloko, Na. Whydah, 27 Feb. 1973. 
Badiji. Chrislophe. Hoja, 3 Oct. 1984. 
Behanzin, Da Agodeka. lime, 3 June 1972. 
Behanzin, Da Camile. Ahomey, 13 July 1972. 
Codjia, Da. Brazilian Quarter, Whydah, 27 Feb. 1973. 
d'Oliveira, Ernest. Abomey, 21 March 1972. 
Descendants of Agbalu Glele, Gbindo, 13 Sept. 1972. 
00&50-Yovo, Da. Whydah. 9 Nov. 1972 
Elders of the house of Hangbe. Abomey, 9 June 1972. 20 July 1984. 
Elders of the house of Hountondji. Abomey, 3 July 1984. 
Elders of the house ofNa Agontime, Tindji. 8 Sept. 1994. 
Elders of the Soude famil y. Abomey, 4 June 1972. 
Feliho, Alexis. Abomey. 18 Sept. 1972, 
Fengbe, Philippe. Agbagnizon, 30 JuJy and 14 Oct. 1972. 
Glele, Da Agbalu. Abomey, 9, 11, and 29 Sept. 1972, 26 Oct. 1972. 
Glele, Da Sagbadju. Abomey, 26 and 28 March. 2S and 29 July 1972. 
Klnhwe, Vincent. Abomey, 24 and 2S March 1972. 1 Feb. 1973, 7 March 1973. 
Legonon, Blandine, and Michael Houseman. Abomey, 29 July 1984. 
Loko. Leonard. Cotonou, 4 Feb. 1973. 
Nondichao, Bachirou. Abomey. 7 and 8 Sept. 1994. 
Ougoton, Da. Jime, 29 June 1972. 
Savakonton, Na. Jime, 30 Jan. 1973. 
Solde, Na, and Da Agonhun. Abomey, 8 Sept. 1994. 
Yai, Olabiyi. personal communication, 18 Nov. 1996. 
Yomana, Da. Ahomey, 6 and 10 June 1972.

--- Page 384 ---
Index 
Italicized page numbers refer to ilustrations. 
Abeokuta, 185-86, 282, 1851 atack on, 190. 
107, 231, 263 
Abomey.4. 9. 37. 41, 42, 43. 84, 100, 1O̩ 117. 
156, 196, 254, 262, :168,.28.2,296. 29r. 
defenses of, 6)-64. Se also plateau. 
Abomey 
Ahson, Lionel, 168-69, 3360.)8 
Adande. Alexandre. :u 
Adandejan, 249-50, 262, :wo, J03. 346n.)8 
Adandozan, King. )0, 86, 157,165, 170, 2.62., 
302; coup against, 171-75, 181-81, 167; 
reign of, 121, IS; 
Adonon, Kpojito, 71-78, 17, 91, 95. 181, 310, 
328n. 53. }28n. 54 
adultery, 245 
Momai,188-89 
Afro-Brazi1jans, 169-71. t88, 190, 194. 196, 
235, 280, 295.314 
Agaja. King" 50, 76, 81, 86, 91, 94, 95. 119. 
131, 137. 142, 165. 3241l.13' conquest of Al­
lada by, ;6-58; conquest ofWhydah by, 
;6-63; palace of, 104; reign of, 63-n. 92, 
97. 108, 19:1, 3250.18. See also dosuj set 
under sucession 
Agasu, 48, 72, 73. 74, 75. 78. 95, 332Il· 53 
agasunon, 74. 80, 252, 318n·52 
agasusi,213 
Agasuvi. Se royal family 
agbada. Se dress 
Agbagnizon. l01-3 
Agbajaten,]o] 
agbajigbeto. Se spies 
Agbanlizun. See Agbagnizon 
Agbidinukun. 31, 40, 293, 19], 199-)00, 
352Il·31 
Agblome. 100, 104 
Agbopanu, 303 
Agbo Sasa, 54 -56 
Agessi Voyon, 100-1, 102 
Agidisu, 83, 88; mother of, 83, 89-90, u8 
Agoliagbo, King. 86, 175. 291. 305-7 
Agonglo, King, 99, 161, 181, 219; death of, 
155, 159, 166, 167; palace of, 104; reign of, 
86, Ul, 151-52 
Agonli, 297, )OS. 306, 335n.26 
Agontime. Kpojito, 80, 162, 178-81, 309-
1O,3390.15,3390.16,340n.18 
Agoue, 280, 282, lB3 
agriculture, 223, 341n.j6; attitudes toward, 
204-5,217, 231-32; in Whydah. 45. See 
also women, faners 
Ahanhanzo, 35. 260, 262, 274> 276, lB3 
ahisinon, 104> 112-13, 235-j6. Se also 
ttad", 
Aho, Rent, 31 
ahosi. 8, 9, 11. 15, 18, 19, 27; functions of, 
209-13: male, 20; power of, lB, 76, 107, 
142-53. 238-44. 269; slave, 17, 144-45· 
Se also palace 
ahovi, 8, 51,]1, 191. See also royal family 
ainon. See earth cul 
Aja, 25. 41, 91, 92, 297. See also Gbe 
ajaho,]2, 113, 252; functions of. 100, 237. 
252-53 
Ajahome, 50 
Ajokpalo, 160, 161 
Akaba, King, 50. 53-56. 86, 93. 325n. 22; 
palace Of,l04, 323n.3 
Akan, 21, 25, 42. 79, 187 
Akati, 190 
Akinjogbin, I. A., 30, 54> 57, sS-59, 61, U4, 
326n.15 
367

--- Page 385 ---
368 
Index 
alafin of 0YO. 80. 1I0. 1I2o 184 
Albeca. Alexandre d'. 31 
alcohol. 11,3. U5, 171-72; and warfare, 60. 
61, 133 
Aligbonon, 72-73. 75. 76, 95, 96 
Alada: city of, 64, 84, 291, 298, 326n.32; 
conquest of, 56-58, 97, 136; kingdom of, 
42, 4,3, 44, 48. 68, 94, 115. 110, l2.2; as 
province of Dahomey. 10), 107-8 
Aladahonu. Se royal family 
Amazons, 1, 278, 34In. 41. Se also any; 
standing, of women 
Amossuga, 99 
anato, 191 
ancestors. 2), 126, 268, 295, 298. See IIlso 
Nesuhwe; religion 
Anibabel, 162 
Alnual Customs. Se Customs, Annual 
appliqu!, 181, 189, 190. 21 
anny, 2, 84, 10), 139-41, 191, 279; levy, 139; 
size of, IlQ, 135, 296; standing, 105-6, 
1)9-40, 147; -. of women, 200-209, 
228 -29, 231, 294. 296.307, 342n.47. See 
also military power; women, wariors 
artisan, 15, 20, 181, 187, 189, ,305. See also 
Mali; Hountondji; Yemadje 
Asante, 4, 79 
Atakpame, 231, 282 
Atcherigbe, 282, 297, 298, 303, 304 
Atchoupa, 292, 294 
Atindebaku, 172, 173. 177. 178. 179, 264 
Atkins, John.)O, 57 
Aublet, Edouard, 31 
Avissou, 82. See also Tegbesu 
Azali, 189 
Badagry, 186, 280, 282 
Badahun (Glele), 221, 260-61, 262, 264, 
265. Se also Glele 
Bagbo, 94-95. Se also divination 
Bahia, 169, 172, 180 
Bariba, 94 
Basilio, Joao, 168-69 
Bayol, Jean, 288, 292, 294 
beads., Il2, 1l3, 125, :lI8. See also crown 
Becon Hunli. 189 
Beum Hwegbo. 174 
Behanzin, King. 32, )6. 193, 248. 251. 255, 
274-77, 297-305, .30.3. 352n.)2; a«;ession 
of, 90; family of, .303. 305. 308, 310-11; 
palace of, 104; reign 0(, 86. 239 
Be1gian Congo, 295 
Benin: contemporary nation-state of, 4, 
275, 299; kingdom of, 52-53, 79-80 
Beraud, Xavier, 288-90 
Binazon, 172. 270, 289, 349n.64 
blacksmiths, 25, 189, 190, 191-92, 335n.31 
blood, 66, 71, 75, u8 
bodyguard. See guard. of king 
bokanlo, 94. 95. See a/$o divination 
bokonon. Se diviners 
8osman, Wiliam, 47, 51, 68, 87. 158 
Brazil, 46, 169, 179, 180, 280 
Brazilians. See Mro-Brazilians 
breaking a house, 51, 125, 287, 288, 296, 
345n.16 
bridewealth, SO. 126, 143, 144. 149. See also 
marnage 
British, 290-91; attitudes toward Daho­
mey, 183-14, 265-66; blockade. 220, 
276; imperialism, 2.82-83; negotiations 
witb Dahomey. 220, 221 
Burton, Richard F., 31, 54> 78, 106, 236, 2)8, 
242-43, 246. 255, 270, 3lsn. 20, 346n.)8 
bush king, 215-22 
cabocers, 98, 99, 105, 106. See also 
ministers 
Cana, .p, 43, U7-18, 137, 15Z, 215, 232, 282 
canibalism, 2, 66, 227-28 
captives, 105, 106, 107. 116, 126, 129, I'l, 147, 
149, 187. 3310.42. See also slavery 
census, 147, 234, 336n. 42 
Chai, Kpojilo, IS2 
Chaudoin, Edouard, 2)8. 241 
Chenevert and Bulet, 30, 69, 85, 93, 112, Il.O, 
139, 142 
chicken, 149, 298, 3)6n.45

--- Page 386 ---
chiefs, colonial, 307. See also caboceers 
Christianity. 166-68. 338n.3 
Chyodotan. 236. 287 
clan, 14 
class, I;, 19. ISO. 199-200, 284 
clients, and patrons, 19, 20, 1]1-72, 175 
clock, 25. 219, 34n. 81 
cloth, 46, 12}, 125, 126, 127-28, 129, 1]1-72, 
332Jl· 44, 3340. 10 
clothing. See dress 
Coissi, Anatole, 33 
Columbian Exposition (Chicago). 278-79, 
350n.13 
commoners, 109, Il, 178, 249, 254-55, 269, 
284. See also royal family. relation of, to 
commoners 
compiementarity, 11-12. See also doubling; 
twinning 
control. by state, 224, 233. 250-59 
coraJ, 83, 123, 126 
Cotonou, 281-82, 282, 287, 292, 304 
Coufo River, 41, 42, So, 188, 282, 303-4 
cowry shells, cowries, 46, 107, 122, 12), 125, 
149,110, 332n. 45 
crime, 235-36, 345n.16 
cross-dressing, 11, 113 
crown, 11, 243, 343n.79 
Customs: Anual (hwetanu), 12-1), 21, 6;-
67. 112, u8, 12, 125-28. 147, 213-22, 229, 
153. 298; -, gift·giving at, 13. 21, 66-67. 
12;: -, Oyo, 214-15: -, preparation for, 
21-12.; -, procession of wealth at, 126-
28; Grand. 12, 55, 81, 116, 153, 164-65, 
268, 295 
cycles, ceremoniaJ, 213-22, 226. See also 
Customs 
Dahomey: attitudes of, toward Europe, 
18)-84, 248, 264: economy of, 120-29, 
194-95,211, 222, 224-26, 2)1-)2: found· 
ing of, 48-50, 72-76; French colony 
of, 171 
Dahpeh, 291. See also Sasse Koka 
daklo, 11, 67 
Index 
369 
cl' Almeida-Topor, Heiene, 137, 139 
Dakodonu, King, 40, so, 73, 74, Il, 
328n·52, 328n. 53 
Dakpo, 173, 174 
Dalzel, Archibald, 29, 84, 105-6. 161, 
168-69 
Dan, so 
Danhome. See Dahomey 
Danhonme. Se Dahomey 
de Soma: Francisco FĦlix, 20. 170-71, 1]6. 
194. 266, 280-81, 344n.l4. 348n. 60; -, 
descendants of, 236, 237. 326n. 2S; Juliao. 
283-84, 286-87 
death: requirement for officials. 116-17, 
163-64, 260,269 
Degbelo, Amelie, 139 
degenon, 329n.lo 
depopulation, 12.1, 14;-46, 3340. 22 
Diamond, Stanley, 6 
divination. 22, 32, 94-95, 132, 145. See 
also Fa 
divine king. See king, divinity of 
diviners, 190-91, 255-58, 270, 34]Tl.47 
division oflabor, 146-47, 196, 197, 3340. 21 
divorce, 19, 144-45 
Dodds, Alfred-AmMte, 297, 298, 300. 
302-3 
Dogan, 155, 161, 166 
Dosso-Yovo, 171, 172. 179, 191 
dosu, 54. 78 
doubling: of offices, 114ĥ15, 151, 239-41 
dress, 11, 24-25, 82-83, 111-12, 114, 242-43. 
See a150 uniforms 
drunkenness. See alcohol 
Duncan, John. 80, 106, 219. 237 
Dunglas, Edouard. 33, 160, 173, 174 
earth cult, 74, 92, Il, 156, 32]0.;1. Seeal$o 
religion 
Egba, 185, 188, 192, 207, 231, 268 
Egbado. See Egba 
Egbo. 291, 296, 304 
Egungun, 24. See also Kutito 
elephant: hunters, 203-4

--- Page 387 ---
370 
Index 
embassies: to France, 297-98, 302. 3srn.26; 
to Portugal, 166, 167, 284, 3)8n.l; to 
Western Hemisphere, 179, 180 
English: mother, 208-9. }43n.61; slave 
trading, 30. Se also under forts 
Equiano, Olaudah, 68 
estate, 15, 72., 76, 89, 99, 109, 145, 167.191, 
'34 
Etchiome,303 
ethnicity. 191 
etymologies, 41. SO. 148 
eunuchs, 8. 11, 67, 100, 108, 113-14. 147.164, 
269, 270; at Oyo, H2-13 
Europe, 26, 214; atitudes of, toward Daho· 
mey, 183-84, Z41, 148, 278-80; influence 
of, on Dahomey. 168-69. 218-19 
Ewe, 41. See aLso Gbe 
Fa (lfa), 80, 94, 190-91, 255-58, 318-19; 
and women, 256-58 
Falcon, Paul, 33 
Fasinu.29O-91 
firearms, 2S, 46, 59-60, 61, 68, 13S, \.40, 141, 
142, 202, 203, 295, 335n.31; and trade. u3 
Fon, 40, 41, 47 
Forbes, Frederick E., 31, 166, 181, 188, 219-
22.6, :129, 239, 242-43, 24-7> 248, 260, 264, 
266,267 
forts, trading, 121, 130, 169; English, 109; 
French, 30, t40-41; Portuguese, 168, 170 
forty-one (magical number), 59, 82 
fostering, 19 
Freeman. Thomas Birch, 174, 215, 217-18. 
262., 264, 265 
French: colonialism, 305-6, 309; colonial 
officials, 32; colonial policy. 37, 2.68; im­
perialism. 31, 36, 282, 284 291; slave trad­
ing, 30, 193; trade in oil, 281; treaties. 220, 
287, 288, 294; war against Dahomey, 287, 
292-97, 299. See also protectorate, 
French; treaties 
friendship, 20; institutionalized, 249-50, 
}46n·39 
Fuglestad, Finn, xii, 327n. 51 
Gakpe (Gezo), liS, 217-18. See also Ge7.0, 
King 
Gallot, Etienne, 141 
gandoba, 191 
Gans². 172, tn, 178, 264 
gap, Dahomey, 40-41 
Garcia, Luc, 293. 296, 301 
gau, 70, 84, 100, 132., 229, 327D. 43. See also 
ministers 
gaunon, 23O 
Gavoy, Administrator, 59-60 
Gbaadu, 257-58. See aLso Fa 
Ghe, 41, 47, 53, 145-46 
Gbetome, 250 
gbonugan daho, 99-100, 114-15> 2.29, 235, 
236-37, 240-41,270, 289, 345n.17. Se 
also ministers 
Gedegbe, 32, 239, 256, 258-59, 275, 289, 
3470.45,347n·51 
Gedevi, 48, 74, 75 
gender: balance, 146. 148; and power, 4-5. 
95-96; ratio in slave trade, 46. 146, 
3240.8. Se also division of labor 
German: colony of To go land, '183; slave 
trading, 193, 283-84, 295 
Geze, Na. 53, 59-60, 62-63, 192, 247-48. 
See also princesses 
Gezo, King, 20, 86, 88, 99, 106, 119-20, tS7, 
166, 232., 237-38, 242> 260, 261, 344Jl.84: 
death of, 155, 259-60, 337n.57. }4n. 82; 
and Hangbe, 55, 56; palace of, 104; reign 
of, 166-2.2.2., 263-69, 314-16 
Ghana. 4 
gift-giving. 25, 105, 107, 128, 332.0.46. Se 
alse customs 
Glehwe (later Whydah town), 42, 45, 46. 
Se also Whydah 
Glele, King, 31, 36. 157, 236, 2)8, 248, 249-
50, 251, 254. 255-)6, 304; acesion of. 
90; death 0(, 159, 288-89, 290, 291, 306, 
350n.13; palace of, 104; reign of, 275 -77 
Gltlt, Maurice Ahanhanzo, 7, 35, 96, 1720 
256, 263. 274 
Gla., PogJ. K.,,,

--- Page 388 ---
Glele, SagOOdju, :lll 
glesi, 191, 34on.2.8 
Gnimavo, 172, 249 
Godomey, 44 
Goho, 104, 189. 297, 298, 299, )00, )02 
gold, 46, 12), 126, 159 
Gu, 22, 189-90 
guard, of king, 68-69, 89, 11), 1)5, 1)7, 161, 
174, 200-1. See also women, wariors; 
army, standing 
Guchili (Agoliagbo), 299-301, 3510.31. See 
also Agoliagbo 
GUdU. 102-) 
guns. See firearms 
Haiti, 48 
half-heads, 25. 114. See also legede 
hamock, 25, 44, 84, 112, 324n.s 
Hangbe, Na, .5)-S6, 314n. 12 
harem. See palace 
Hazoume, Paul, 33, 131-)2, 171-72 .. 
174. 301, 
348n·52 
Herskovits, Melvile J.,)2, 92, 94. 156, 241-
42, )30n.:l4. 337n. 57 
Heviosso, 22, ll, 155-56 
hierarchy, 13-15, 126, 14)-44; religious. 23 
history: commoditization of, 37; problems 
of writing, 28-29. 34-39; Western inter­
pretations of, 57-6) 
horses, us, 116. See also sagan 
hoslage-taking, 82, 8). 292, 294 
Houffon, King (Whydah), 58-60, 6), 88 
Hountondji, 191-92 
household (hwe). 14; ofthe king, 50-51. 
See also palace 
Hwanjile, Kpojito, 82, 88, 89. 91-96, 102, 
u8, 152, 162, 168. 181, 252-5), )14> ))On.24 
HwOOa, 45, 64, 120, 130, 136, 140-41.169. 
See also Whydah 
hwetanu. Se Customs 
Ifa. Sec Fa 
ilari, Ui, 114 
imperialism, European, 276, 277-84 
Index 
371 
informers, 235. See also Jegede; spies; 
surveilance 
interpreters, 2,38 
interregnum, 81, 87, 15)-54, 158-59, 161-
62. See also succession 
Islam. Se Muslims 
iya 000. 80 
Jakin, 42, 44, 65, 66, 79, 108 
Jegbe. 104, 26:l 
lime, 104, 262-
Johnsen, SamueJ, 114 
Josu of Munyon, 172, 17), 175 
jOIO.84 
'upera, 160 
kannumon, 191 
Kerekou, Matthieu, 335n. 26 
Ketonou, 28), 291 
)(etu, 133, 1]2, 230-31. 2]1, 282 
king: audiences with, 2-)7-)8, 288; death of, 
153-64> divinity of, 79, 112, 120, 332.0. 51; 
and Fa. 258; funeral of, 12. 81; list of, 49; 
mariage to, 18; and monarchy, 7, 250; 
mystification of, 11, 242, 243; power of, 
243-44,312-13; procession of wealth of, 
126-2.8; regalia of, 227, )0,; and slave 
trade, 124; tomb of, 10. See also under 
names o/king, 
Kinhwe, Vincent, 148 
kinship, 14-15. t6-21, 78, 123. )20 
Kondo (Behanzin), 262, 274-77, 283.:l8S, 
345n.51, 349n.1. See also Behanzin 
ko swamp, 41, 43, 107 
Kpengla, King.137-}8, 1)9, 164, 165; aces· 
sion of, 160-61; death of, 155, 335n.26, 
)37n.63; palace of, l04j reign of, 86, 116-
17, 120-21 
kpo, 72, 74, lS7. 242-
kpojito, IS, 137, 144, 150, 161, 178, 181-82, 
191, :1]1-72, 304; creation of office of. 
71-80; definition of, ]1-72; list of, 49, 
32]ll. 47, 328n. 55. See al,o under names 
ofkpGjito

--- Page 389 ---
372 
Index 
kpoli, 94, 190, 157. Se also Fa 
kposi, 164, 242-44, 332n·52, 345n. 27 
Kutito, 190 
Kutome, 22-24, 225, 250 
Labarthe, P., 119 
Lagos, 169, 280, 282, 28), 289, 290-91, 297 
Lama, 41, 42, 203. Sce also ko swamp 
Lamb, Bulfinch, 29, 51, 64-69, )23n.I) 
Landiga, 82, 87, 88 
Law, Robin, 34, 54-55, 58-59, 61, 70, 73, 84, 
97, 106, 130,137 
Lefu Lefu, 188 
Legba, 2.2 
legede, 25, 100, 113. 114, 235. 33211. 54 
legitimacy, 38, )19-20; of dynasty, 74 -76, 
91-92, 119, 156-58, 24), 327n.51; of indi­
vidual kings, 12, 90-91, 216, 285 
Le Herisse, A., 1,)2, 38, 40, 49. 58. 69, 70, 
86.99, 177. 242, 246,247,249,262-63, 
308, )28n·55, )300. 24 
leopard. Se kpo 
lineage, 14, 16-2.1, 22, 143-44, 145, 244-45 
Lisa, 91, 95-96, 155. 168, 152, 258-59 
Lissezoume, 101 
Lombard. Jacques. 33 
Mahi, 42, 55, 78, 84, Il, 136. 152, 185. 230, 
337n·53 
maize (corn), 103. 188 
Makhi. Se Mahi 
malaria, 46 
Manning. Patrick, 47, 146, 195, )33n.6 
Marchais. Chevalier des, 51, 70. 141 
markets, 2.12 
mariage, 14-15, 17. 18. 20, 53, 143-45, 310. 
336n.)6; of king to officials, 101-3, 189. 
Sce also polygyny 
masquerades, 24 
Maupoil, Bemard, 32. 91, 92, 94, 174> 156, 
258-59 
Mawu, 92, 95-96, 155, 168, 252, 158-59 
Mbogela.55 
Menuswe,JoJ 
Mercier, Paul, 3J, 52-53 
merit. 14-15, 208 
meu, 8), 14, 87, 89. 99, 100, 126, 172, 177, 
262,264; functions of. 69-70, 10), 109; 
residence of, 10, 255. Sce also ministers 
roeunon, us, 208 
Meusi, 109 
migan, 87, 99, 100, 126, 154, 161, 172, 177, 
229, 2.64; functions of, 69-70. 103, 109. 
240. Se also ministers 
miganon, 208, 240 
Migansi, 209, 300 
militarism, 50, 130, 226-)3, 263, )15. )17, 
)48n.59. See also army 
miliury power, 13, 129-42 
ministers, 87. 98-110. 177, 2JO; and trade, 
10)-4. See also ajaho; gau; meu; migan; 
sagan; Yovogan 
missionaries, 168, 186, 207, 2.20, 282, 
348n·55 
Mivede, 94. 252-53 
M'Lead, John, 84-85 
Moloney, Alfred, 2go-91 
monarchy. 7-8, 15.16, 19-21, 23. 2.6, 2.7-28, 
37. 76, 81,98, 175,190, 224-2.6,239, 248, 
285. 29),305, 307, 312-14,315-16 
Mono River, 42, 81, 280, 282 
Montaguere, Joseph OUivier, 167, 168-69. 
See also Oliveira 
motherhood, U5, 304; biological, ofk.ing, 
]8-80, 89-go, 151, 2]2, 289, 349n.68 
mulatto, ]8, 336n.)8, 352n.39 
MŃ de I'Homme, 189. 343n.79 
Muslims, 24. 94 184-85 
na daho, 52-56,]1, 12.6, 174, 247, 251, JOo. 
See also princesses 
Nesuhwe, 39. 179, 250-51, 253, 254, 309 
Nigeria, 4 
Nokoue, Lake, 42, 58, 281 
Norris, Robert, 29, 50, 84, 97-98, 98-99, 
108 -9, 11:1., 117, 12, 126, 149, 153 
Nugbodowhe. 256 
oath taking, 20-2.1, 12), 131-32,)01 
Offrn, 44

--- Page 390 ---
Ogun River, 186,282 
oil palm: cultivation, 194, 2]2. See also 
palm oil 
Oliveira: Ernest d', ]]; famil y, 167, 16,9: 
Nioola d', 171i Sophie, 167, In, ]38n.] 
olokun esin, liS. Sce also sogan 
oml history, ]5. 37-]8, 317 
oraJ interpretation, Dahomean, 57-63, 83, 
1]1-]2, ]510.31 
oraJ traditions, 36, 40, 48, 54. 56, 5,9-60, 
90,92, 182-8], 262, 275, 292-9], 29,9-
303 
Oro, 24, 1,90 
Ouanilo.]03 
Oyo, 4. 25-26, 44, 120, 156, ]1]; cavalry of, 
41, 64, 142; collapse of, 184-85: cultuml 
impact of, 1l0-18, 125, 1,90; Dahomean 
wars with, 81-82, 83, 136, 140, 185; queen 
mother in, 80; relations between Daho­
mey and, 5], 58, 8), 84. 97, I]T. women 
warriors in, 68 
oyo mesi, lIO 
palace, 1. 6-13, 15-16, 27-28, 67-6,9, ,96, 
u8, 142-53, 178, 2]0, 272-7], ]05. ]07, 
]12-14, ]15-16, ]27n. 37; industries, 210; 
inhabitants of, given as wives, 126; of­
fices of, 70-71, 98-no, 248, 270-71; or­
ganization of, 18, 1,98-213, 345n. 11; plan 
of, 10, 72, 104, 2]7-38; recruitment 10, 76, 
142-44,190, 19,9-200, 34211.58; religion 
in, 167-68; size of, 51, 143, 199, 284; Slor­
age in, 128, 147; and succession, 85, 87, 
88, 89, 172, 2.60,269; and trade, 112.-13; 
wals of, ], 9. See also women, warriors; 
guard, of king 
palm nuts, 103, 197 
palm oil, 103, 12,9, 171. 2.35: production, 
194-,95,1,97-98.2.]3; trade in, 193-,98, 
199,220 
palm wine. See alcohol 
parties, polilical, 87. IS], 160, 263 -64, 2.85, 
)48n·53 
patrilineage. Se lineage 
patron-client relations, 123-2.4, 12.8 
Index 
373 
patrons, and clients. See clients, and 
patrons 
Paussie, 105 
pawning, 123, 14 
perpetual kinship, 38-],9 
Pires, Vicenle Ferreira, ]0, 150, 154. 159, 
161-62, 164, 165,166-67 
plantations, 116, 188-89. 194. 196 
plateau, Abomey, 40-41, 75. 107-8, 2.98, 
305,306 
Polanyi, Kar!, 6 
polygyny, 8, 78, 143> 148, 150, 307, ]]611.44 
Pommegorge, Pruneau de, 30, 88, 89, n4. 
12.1, 12.6, 1]3, 140-41, 168-69 
Popa, 13, l)6, 140 -41; Little, 16,9, 170, 171 
Porto Novo, 33, 48, 88, 120, Il, 194. 280, 
281, 283, 2.,92, 293-94. 296, 32,9n.n 
Portugal, 170, 280, 3450.19; embassies to, 
166, 167, 180, 2B4; king of, 166; slave trade 
of. ]0. 19), 295 
positional succession, 38-39, 55, 76,,91 
pottery, 2.5, 210, 339n. 8 
power, 4-5, 6-8, 16. 27. 95-96, 2.84; of 
king, 175; state, 26; of stale over lineages, 
17-21, 101-2; of state over religion, 23-
24. 9]; supernaturaÜ 81, 95, 334n.15; al 
times of succession, 8, 81. 87. 90-91; 
of vodun. 2]-24> 92. Su also religion; 
women, pawer of 
praise name, 83, 165. 179, 299 
praise singers, 174 
priest. 24, 7], 91. 180. See also agasunon 
primogeniture, 84, )29n.9. Se also 
• 
succesion 
princes, 88, 89, 1]'2 
princeses, 8, 51-56, 63, 126, 127, 162, 172, 
230,244-49,308, 310, ]26n.2.4; sexuality 
of, 52; status of, 52-53. See also na daho 
prison, 103. 287, 296 
prostitution, 149-50, 21O-11 
prostration: to greet king, 80, 329n. 58 
protectorate, 285; British. 2,91; French, 281. 
283, 267. 297; German, 283; Portuguese, 
283-84,286-87 
python. Se snake

--- Page 391 ---
374 
Index 
queen mother, in neighboring areas. 79-
80. See also kpojito 
Quenum: Maximilien, 33; family, 345n. 16 
regent, 53, 54, 55, 80, 86, 154, 17). 174, 176 
Rtgis, Victor, 220 
Reid, John, 195, 263 
religion, 11-24> 66, 250-59, J14, 318-19. See 
also snake; spirit mediumship; vodun 
Repin, Dr., 264, 339n.11, 348n.55 
ritual, 226-28, 232; disorder, 159, 33711. 6z 
Roman Catho licism. See Christianity 
royal family, 2, 22, 70, 156, 176, 191, 2Z5, 229, 
230, 251, 274, 300-3OZ, 305-6, 308, 312, 
314,310-21; afiliation in, 14, SI-52, 56, 
24, 245; marriage in, 8, 310; and offices 
of state, 137; origins of, 72-73, U)); rela­
tion of, to commoners. 75-76, 95-96, 
98, 1;n., 175, 253-55, 272-nSee also le­
gitimacy; princes; princesses; tohosu 
royal household. See palace 
ruses, in warfare, 61. l.3. 230-.31 
Sacks, Karen, 246 
sacrifice.:u, 65: equine, 115. u6; human, 
2, 3, 65-66. 118, 1)4, 159, 161-63. 176, 
200, 220-11,263, 165-69.298,304-5, 
348n. 59. }48n. 60, 349n. 61 
Sado. See Tado 
Sagbata. Se£ Sakpata 
Sahenni, 99, 101-2 
Sakpata, 92, 1lI, 155-58, 320 
sandals, 74, 80, 173 
Sio Tome, 284, 195 
Sasse Koka, 275-76, 291, .302, .350n.18 
Savi, 42, 44-4). 58, 59, 60, 79 
Senume, Kpojito, 151, 167 
sexuality, 11, 106, 245, 146, 248, 342n. 53 
Shampo, 97-98 
Shango, ll, Il], 156. See also Heviosso 
Shoponna, 11, 158. See also Sakpata 
silver, 123, 126, 159, 297 
Singboji,lO, 12 
Sinkutin, 172 
Skenchly" . A., 31, SS, 81, 127-28, 234, zj8, 
242-43, 262, 274 
slavery, 14, IS, 35, 43, 144-45, 146, 149, 162, 
179, 188-89. 196. See also ahosi: captives 
slaves: branding of, 46; return of, 179, 186; 
revolts of, 46, 192, 26.3 
slave trade, 2., 3, 29-31, 42-48, 64, 65, 12]-
24. u8-29, 145-46, 162., 166,176,180, 
18}, 185, 191-93, 286, 295, ]12-13; at­
tempts to suppress, 57, 221, 265, ]26n.15; 
decline of, 12O-Z1, 187: and gender, 46, 
146, ]24Jl.8: goods exchanged in, 46, 12}, 
295; internal, 19]; middle passage, 71; and 
ministers, 103-4> and palm oil, 196, 281, 
315, 34ID.3); prices in, 46: revenues from, 
124, 333n.6; route to coast, 43-4]; tenns 
of, 108, 124, 333n.5: volume of, 47, 
324n. 25, See al50 captives; traders. in 
slaves 
smallpox. 11, 155-57, 274. 196, 337n.57 
Smith, William, 45, 67 
snake, python, 60, 61-62, 331D. 25 
Sneigrave, WilIiam, 29, 53, 60, 61, 64-69, 
70-71,106-7,108 
sagan, 99, 115-17; functions of, 115-16 
Soglo, 300, JOl 
songs, 2.06-7, 271-72 
Sophie (wif of Ollivier Montaguere). Se£ 
Oliveira 
spies, ll, 63, 1)1-31, 207-8, 237, 247 
spirit mediumship, 94, 95 
strong namk. See praise name 
succession, 153-65, 284; principles of, 7. 56, 
84-91, 149, 259-7}' 312, 316, 3)On.l2; 
strugles, 159-61, 319: -, by Adan­
dozan, 87, 161-62; -. by Agaja, 53-56; 
-, by Agonglo. 161; -, by Behanzin, 87, 
285-86,289-91, 293-96,302; -, by 
Gew, 166-78, 180: -, by Gleie, 269-70: 
-, by Kpengla, 87, 160-61; -, by Teg­
besu, 81-91; -, role of guards in, 69 
suicide, 42-43, 46, 134, 145. See also death, 
requirement for officials 
surveillance, 233-44- See also spiks, control

--- Page 392 ---
Tado (Sado), 42, 48. 72. 73. 282. 291 
Tanga. See Yovogan 
taxation, 13, 21, 67. 103, 109, 122-23, 211-12. 
233-34, 305,306, 315; customs, 234, 286, 
287,238 
technology, westem, 24-26, 63, 1)0-31, 
184 295, 335n.31. See also Gallot, Etienne 
Tegbesu. King, 25. 41, 50, 128, 146, 151, IS,}, 
163, 31ĵ palace of, J04; reign of, 81-u8, 
119-20 
Testefol, 64, 1)0 
Tidjani, Serpos, 33 
tobacco, 46, 123, US, 150, 171-72, 233 
Toffa. King (Porto Novo). 281, 283, 287, 
292, 294, 296, 301 
Toffo (Tufoe) 42. 65-66 
Togo, 48, 72 
tohosu. 93, 157-SI, 150, 251-54, 318. See also 
Zumadunu 
tohwiyo, 14; of royal lineage, 48 
Tokpa. 83-84 
Tokpa Meie, 290, 291, 300, 305-6 
Tometin, 171, 177, 178, 262, :WIn. 54 
tononu, u.}, 260, 264, 270 
Tori. 42, 44 
trade routes, 117, 147-48 
traders, in slaves, 103-5, 109. 123. See also 
king, and slave trade 
treaties, 220. 221, 263. 286 
tribute, 82, 97. U2, 137, 185. See also 
taxation 
Tufoe. See Toffo 
twining, 13, 54> 78, 95, 209, 216, 246 
umbrela, 67. II 
uniforms, 201 
variolation, 157 
veil, of beads, 1l2. 218, 3)2.1.52 
Verger, Pierre, 33, 157,179-80 
vidaho, 85, 86, 160, 161, 160-63, 273, 275, 
3" 
Videkalo, 270 
Vidotote, jOj 
Index 
375 
vigan, 100, 151. Se also Agessi Voyon 
virginity, 246 
Visesegan, 213, 233, 271, 275-76, 176-77, 
285, 288-89,291,296, 309, )16-17, 
350n.18, 3510. 24 
vodun. 3, 21-24, 61, 91-94 146, 168; popu­
lar, 253, 1S6, 319, 330n.2.4; protective, 131. 
Se also palace, religion in; religion; 
snake 
vodunon, 24 92. See also priest 
vodunsi, :12, 24, 39 
Voglosu. 172, 177. 264, 34Bn.54. See also 
m'u 
warfare, 55. 61-63, 65-66. 118, 226-28, 267; 
against Abeokuta. 186; against France. 
192-97, 3510.23, 35tn. 25; Gbe princi­
ples of. 131-41, 130, 297> and oil trade. 
195-96. See also military power, Weme 
,,]Iq 
Wassa, 42, 72·. 73 
Wawe. 42, 48, 49. 300, 328n·52 
wealth, 15, 16, 17, 18, 66, 76, 109-110, 1l3, 
129,224-26.234-35,328n·54 
weapons, 68, 192, 202-3, 204-5. Se also 
firearms 
Wegbaja, King, 50, 68-69, 73. 75, 146. 182, 
32J1l.50; palace of, 104 
Weme Jighe. 76, 318n.54 
Weme River, 37, 42, 120, 282, 292, 295, 
304 
Weme valley, 280, 281, 296; warfare in, 
55. 58 
Whydah, 284; conquest of, 56-63, 97, 191; 
kingdom of, 44 45, 64, 68, 70, 87, 88. 94, 
1140 12, 149, ISO, 158-59. 329n.9. 329n.ll; 
king's household in, 48, 51, 79, 145, ISO. 
163. 325n.14; port of, 4. 47, 107, 169, 193. 
280.282, 195; as province of Dahomey, 
107-8. 331n.47; surf at. 47; traders at, 
135.2)6; warfare in. 135> 136 
Wives of king, 305, 308: favorite, 84-85. 151, 
151, 137. 262, 271; and succession, 86; and 
trade. 104. 105. See also ahosi; palace

--- Page 393 ---
376 
Index 
women: control over, 24; demand for labor 
of, 197-98; farmers, 68, 197, 204-); his­
tory of, 4 -Si poners. 197; power of, S, 
150-51,152, 198,308; -, in marriage, 15, 
143-45; traders., 91. 199; value of, 33, 148. 
34tn·34; warriors, 54, 68. 134-35. 136-39, 
261. See also ahosi; palace 
Yavedo, 269-70, 271 
Yemadje, 181, 189, 2l, 340n. 20 
Yewe. See English: mother 
Yoruba, 24. 25. 26. 42, 49, 94, 95. 117, 28B-
89.316; cultural influence of, 186-92, 
zlB, 255; kingdoms, 4. 52-53. 156. Se 
also Oyo 
Yovogan, 70, 91, 97, 100, 103, IOB-9, 113, 116, 
141, 240, 241-42,287 
yovoganoIl. 209. 240 
Zagnanado,282 
Zingah. B3-B4 
Zinkponon, 99. 102. 109, 123, 251 
lou River, 41, 42, 297, 299 
Zoyindi. Kpojito, 78. 271-72. 276, 349n. 67. 
349n.68 
Zumadunu. 93-94> 157-58, 251-53, 259, 
31B. See also tohosu

